CHAPTER SIX

SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION

6.1 INTRODUCTION

In the earlier chapters we primarily considered the motion
of a single particle. (A particle is ideally represented as a

6.1 Introduction point mass having no size.)  We applied the results of our
6.2 Centre of mass study even to the motion of bodies of finite size, assuming
6.3 Motion of centre of mass that motion of such bodies can be described in terms of the
6.4 Linear momentum of a motion of a particle.

system of particles Any real body which we encounter in daily life has a
6.5 Vector product of two vectors finite size.  In dealing with the motion of extended bodies
6.6 Angular velocity and its (bodies of finite size) often the idealised model of a particle is

relation with linear velocity inadequate.  In this chapter we shall try to go beyond this
6.7 Torque and angular inadequacy.  We shall attempt to build an understanding of

momentum the motion of extended bodies.  An extended body, in the
6.8 Equilibrium of a rigid body first place, is a system of particles.  We shall begin with the

6.9 Moment of inertia consideration of motion of the system as a whole.  The centre

6.10 of mass of a system of particles will be a key concept here.
Kinematics of rotational
motion about a fixed axis We shall discuss the motion of the centre of mass of a system

of particles and usefulness of this concept in understanding
6.11 Dynamics of rotational

motion about a fixed axis the motion of extended bodies.
A large class of problems with extended bodies can be

6.12 Angular momentum in case
of rotation about a fixed solved by considering them to be rigid bodies.  Ideally a

axis rigid body is a body with a perfectly definite and
unchanging shape.  The distances between all pairs of

Summary
particles of such a body do not change. It is evident from

Points to Ponder this definition of a rigid body that no real body is truly rigid,
Exercises since real bodies deform under the influence of forces. But in

many situations the deformations are negligible.  In a number
of situations involving bodies such as wheels, tops, steel
beams, molecules and planets on the other hand, we can ignore
that they warp (twist out of shape), bend or vibrate and treat
them as rigid.

6.1.1 What kind of motion can a rigid body have?

Let us try to explore this question by taking some examples
of the motion of rigid bodies.  Let us begin with a rectangular

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 93

most common way to constrain a rigid body so
that it does not have translational motion is to
fix it along a straight line. The only possible
motion of such a rigid body is rotation. The line
or fixed axis about which the body is rotating is
its axis of rotation. If you look around, you will
come across many examples of rotation about
an axis, a ceiling fan, a potter’s wheel, a giant
wheel in a fair, a merry-go-round and so on (Fig

Fig 6.1 Translational (sliding) motion of a block down
6.3(a) and (b)).

an inclined plane.
(Any point like P  or P of the block moves

1 2 

with the same velocity at any instant of time.)

block sliding down an inclined plane without any
sidewise movement.  The block is taken as a rigid
body.  Its motion down the plane is such that all
the particles of the body are moving together,
i.e. they have the same velocity at any instant
of time. The rigid body here is in pure
translational motion (Fig. 6.1).

In pure translational motion at any
instant of time, all particles of the body have
the same velocity.

Consider now the rolling motion of a solid
metallic or wooden cylinder down the same

(a)
inclined plane (Fig. 6.2). The rigid body in this
problem, namely the cylinder, shifts from the
top to the bottom of the inclined plane, and thus,
seems to have translational motion.  But as Fig.
6.2 shows, all its particles are not moving with
the same velocity at any instant. The body,
therefore, is not in pure translational motion.
Its motion is translational plus ‘something else.’

Fig. 6.2 Rolling motion of a cylinder. It is not pure
translational motion. Points P , P , P  and P

1 2  3 4

have different velocities (shown by arrows) (b)
at any instant of time. In fact, the velocity of

Fig. 6.3 Rotation about a fixed axis
the point of contact P is zero at any instant,

3 (a) A ceiling fan
if the cylinder rolls without slipping.

(b) A potter’s wheel.

In order to understand what this ‘something Let us try to understand what rotation is,
else’ is, let us take a rigid body so constrained what characterises rotation.  You may notice that
that it cannot have translational motion.  The in rotation of a rigid body about a fixed axis,

2024-25



94 PHYSICS

Fig. 6.5 (a) A spinning top
(The point of contact of the top with the
ground, its tip O, is fixed.)

Axis of oscillation

Axis of
rotation

from blades
Fig. 6.4 A rigid body rotation about the z-axis (Each

point of the body such as P  or
1

P  describes a circle with its centre (C
2 1

or C ) on the axis of rotation.  The radius of
2

the circle (r or r ) is the perpendicular
1 2

distance of the point (P  or P ) from the
1 2

axis. A point on the axis like P remains
3 

stationary).

every particle of the body moves in a circle, Fig. 6.5 (b) An oscillating table fan with rotating
blades. The pivot of the fan, point O, is

which lies in a plane perpendicular to the axis
fixed. The blades of the fan are under

and has its centre on the axis.  Fig. 6.4 shows rotational motion, whereas, the axis of
the rotational motion of a rigid body about a fixed rotation of  the fan blades is oscillating.
axis (the z-axis of the frame of reference).  Let P

1 In some examples of rotation, however, the
be a particle of the rigid body, arbitrarily chosen axis may not be fixed.  A prominent example of
and at a distance r  from fixed axis.  The particle

1 this kind of rotation is a top spinning in place
P  describes a circle of radius  r with its centre

1 1 [Fig. 6.5(a)].  (We assume that the top does not
C  on the fixed axis.  The circle lies in a plane

1 slip from place to place and so does not have
perpendicular to the axis. The figure also shows translational motion.)  We know from experience
another particle P  of the rigid body, P is at a

2 2 that the axis of such a spinning top moves
distance r from the fixed axis. The particle P

2 2 around the vertical through its point of contact
moves in a circle of radius r and with centre C

2 2 with the ground, sweeping out a cone as shown
on the axis. This circle, too, lies in a plane in Fig. 6.5(a).  (This movement of the axis of the
perpendicular to the axis.  Note that the circles top around the vertical is termed precession.)
described by P  and P  may lie in different planes; Note, the point of contact of the top with

1 2

both these planes, however, are perpendicular ground is fixed. The axis of rotation of the top
to the fixed axis.  For any particle on the axis at any instant passes through the point of
like P , r = 0. Any such particle remains contact. Another simple example of this kind of

3

stationary while the body rotates.  This is rotation is the oscillating table fan or a pedestal
expected since the axis of rotation is fixed. fan [Fig.6.5(b)]. You may have observed that the

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 95

axis of rotation of such a fan has an oscillating Thus, for us rotation will be about a fixed axis
(sidewise) movement in a horizontal plane about only unless stated otherwise.
the vertical through the point at which the axis The rolling motion of a cylinder down an
is pivoted (point O in Fig. 6.5(b)). inclined plane is a combination of rotation about

While the fan rotates and its axis moves a fixed axis and translation.  Thus, the
sidewise, this point is fixed.  Thus, in more ‘something else’ in the case of rolling motion
general cases of rotation, such as the rotation which we referred to earlier is rotational motion.
of a top or a pedestal fan, one point and not You will find Fig. 6.6(a) and (b) instructive from
one line, of the rigid body is fixed. In this case this point of view. Both these figures show
the axis is not fixed, though it always passes motion of the same body along identical
through the fixed point. In our study, however, translational trajectory. In one case, Fig. 6.6(a),
we mostly deal with the simpler and special case the motion is a pure translation; in the other
of rotation in which one line (i.e. the axis) is fixed. case [Fig. 6.6(b)] it is a combination of translation

and rotation. (You may try to reproduce the two
types of motion shown, using a rigid object like
a heavy book.)

We now recapitulate the most important
observations of the present section: The motion
of a rigid body which is not pivoted or fixed in
some way is either a pure translation or a
combination of translation and rotation. The
motion of a rigid body which is pivoted or fixed

Fig. 6.6(a) Motion of a rigid body which is pure
in some way is rotation.  The rotation may be

translation.
about an axis that is fixed (e.g. a ceiling fan) or
moving (e.g. an oscillating table fan [Fig.6.5(b)]).
We shall, in the present chapter, consider
rotational motion about a fixed axis only.

6.2  CENTRE OF MASS

We shall first see what the centre of mass of a
system of particles is and then discuss its
significance. For simplicity we shall start with
a two particle system. We shall take the line

Fig. 6.6(b) Motion of a rigid body which is a joining the two particles to be the x- axis.
combination of translation and
rotation.

Fig 6.6 (a) and 6.6 (b) illustrate different motions of
the same body. Note P is an arbitrary point of the
body; O is the centre of mass of the body, which is
defined in the next section. Suffice to say here that
the trajectories of O are the translational trajectories
Tr  and Tr of the body. The positions O and P at

1 2 

three different instants of time are shown by O , O ,
1 2

and O , and P , P  and P , respectively, in both
3 1 2 3

Figs. 6.6 (a) and (b) . As seen from Fig. 6.6(a), at any
instant the velocities of any particles like O and P of
the body are the same in pure translation. Notice, in
this case the orientation of OP, i.e. the angle OP makes

Fig. 6.7
with a fixed direction, say the horizontal, remains
the same, i.e. α = α  = α . Fig. 6.6 (b) illustrates a case

1 2 3

of combination of translation and rotation. In this case, Let the distances of the two particles be x
1

at any instants the velocities of O and P differ. Also, and x  respectively from some origin O. Let m
2 1

α , α  and α  may all be different. and m  be respectively the masses of the two
1 2 3 2

2024-25



96 PHYSICS

particles. The centre of mass of the system is
m (y

that   point C which is at a distance X from O, 1 + y2 + y3 ) y1 + y2 + y
Y = = 3

where X is given by 3m 3
Thus, for three particles of equal mass, the

X = m1x1 + m2x2 centre of mass coincides with the centroid of the
m (6.1)

1 + m2 triangle formed by the particles.
In Eq. (6.1), X can be regarded as the mass- Results of Eqs. (6.3a) and (6.3b) are

weighted mean of  x and x . If the two particles generalised easily to a system of n particles, not
1 2

have the same mass m  = m  = m then necessarily lying in a plane, but distributed in
1 2 , 

space. The centre of mass of such a system is
= mx1 + mx2 = x

X 1 + x2 at (X, Y, Z ), where
2m 2

Thus, for two particles of equal mass the ∑m i x i
X = (6.4a)

centre of mass lies exactly midway between M
them.

       If we have n particles of masses m , m , miy
1 2 = ∑ i

Y (6.4b)
...m  respectively, along a straight line taken as M

n

the x- axis, then by definition the position of the
m

centre of the mass of the system of particles is and = ∑ izi
  Z (6.4c)

given by. M

n Here M = ∑m i is the total mass of the
∑ m ix i

m
X 1x1+m x ... +m x

2 2+ nx m
n i 1 ∑ i i

= system. The index i runs from 1 to n; m  is the
= = =   (6.2)

n i
m1+m2 +... +mn m

∑ m ∑ i mass of the ith particle and the position of the
i

i=1 ith particle is given by (x , y , z ).
i i i

where  x , x ,...x  are the distances of the
1 2 n Eqs. (6.4a), (6.4b) and (6.4c) can be

particles from the origin; X is also measured from combined into one equation using the notation

the same origin. The symbol ∑ (the Greek letter of position vectors. Let  ri  be the position vector

sigma) denotes summation, in this case over n of the ith particle and R be the position vector of
particles. The sum the centre of mass:

∑m i = M  r = x ɵi + y ɵj ki i i + zi

is the total mass of the system. and R = X ɵi +Y ɵj+ Zk
Suppose that we have three particles, not

lying in a straight line. We may define x– and y– m i i
axes in the plane in which the particles lie and R = ∑ r

represent the positions of the three particles by Then  M (6.4d)
coordinates (x ,y ), (x ,y ) and (x ,y ) respectively. The sum on the right hand side is a vector

1 1 2 2 3 3
Let the masses of the three particles be m , m sum.

1 2
and m respectively. The centre of mass C of

3 Note the economy of expressions we achieve
the system of the three particles is defined and by use of vectors. If the origin of the frame of
located by the coordinates (X, Y) given by reference (the coordinate system) is chosen to

m be the centre of mass then  ∑mi ri = 0 for the
1x1 + m2x2 + m

= 3x
X 3

m given system of particles.
1 + m2 + (6.3a)

m3
A rigid body, such as a metre stick or a

m flywheel, is a system of closely packed particles;
1y1 + m2y2 + m3yY = 3

m Eqs. (6.4a), (6.4b), (6.4c) and (6.4d) are therefore,
1 + m2 + (6.3b)

m3
applicable to a rigid body. The number of

For the particles of equal mass m = m  = m
1 2 particles (atoms or molecules) in such a body is

= m ,
3 so large that it is impossible to carry out the

m (x summations over individual particles in these
= 1 + x 2 + x 3 ) x

= 1 + x 2 + x
X 3

3m 3 equations. Since the spacing of the particles is

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 97

small, we can treat the body as a continuous Let us consider a thin rod, whose width and
distribution of mass. We subdivide the body into breath (in case the cross section of the rod is
n small elements of mass;  ∆m , ∆m ... ∆m ; the rectangular) or radius (in case the cross section

1 2 n

ith element  ∆m is taken to be located about the of the rod is cylindrical) is much smaller than
i 

point  (x , y , z ). The coordinates of the centre of its length. Taking the origin to be at the
i i i

mass are then approximately given by geometric centre of the rod and x-axis to be
along the length of the rod, we can say that on

(∆m i )x i (∆ ) (∆ )
= ∑

, = ∑ m i yi = ∑ m i zi
X Y ,Z account of reflection symmetry, for every

∑ ∆m i ∑ ∆m i ∑ ∆m i element dm of the rod at x, there is an element
of the same mass dm located at –x (Fig. 6.8).

As we make n bigger and bigger and each
∆m  smaller and smaller, these expressions

i The net contribution of every such pair to
become exact. In that case, we denote the sums
over i by integrals. Thus, the integral and hence the integral  itself

∑ ∆ is zero.  From Eq. (6.6), the point for which the
m i → ∫ dm = M ,

integral  itself is zero, is the centre of mass.

∑ Thus, the centre of mass of a homogenous thin
(∆m i )x i → ∫ x dm,

rod coincides with its geometric centre. This can

∑ be understood on the basis of reflection symmetry.
(∆m i )yi → ∫y dm,

The same symmetry argument will apply to
homogeneous rings, discs, spheres, or even

 and ∑ (∆m i )zi → ∫ z dm
thick rods of circular or rectangular cross

Here M is the total mass of the body. The section. For all such bodies you will realise that
coordinates of the centre of mass now are for every element dm at a point (x, y, z ) one can

1 1 1 always take an element of the same mass at
X = ∫ x dm,Y = ∫ y dm and Z = ∫ z dm     (6.5a)

M M M the point (–x, –y, –z ). (In other words, the origin
The vector expression equivalent to these is a point of reflection symmetry for these

three scalar expressions is bodies.) As a result, the integrals in Eq. (6.5 a)
all are zero. This means that for all the above

1
R = rdm . b bodies, their centre of mass coincides with their

M ∫ (6 5 )
geometric centre.

If we choose, the centre of mass as the origin
of our coordinate system, u Example 6.1 Find the centre of mass of

R = 0 three particles at the vertices of an
equilateral triangle. The masses of the

i.e., ∫ rdm = 0 particles are 100g, 150g, and 200g
respectively. Each side of the equilateral

or ∫ x dm =∫ y dm = ∫ z dm = 0 (6.6) triangle is 0.5m long.

Often we have to calculate the centre of mass of
Answer

homogeneous bodies of regular shapes like rings,
discs, spheres, rods etc. (By a homogeneous body
we mean a body with uniformly distributed
mass.) By using symmetry consideration, we can
easily show that the centres of mass of these
bodies lie at their geometric centres.

Fig. 6.8 Determining the CM of a thin rod. Fig. 6.9

2024-25



98 PHYSICS

With the x–and y–axes chosen as shown in Fig. concurrence of the medians, i.e. on the centroid
6.9, the coordinates of points O, A and B forming G of the triangle.       ⊳
the equilateral triangle are respectively (0,0),

(0.5,0), (0.25,0.25 3 ). Let the masses 100 g, u Example 6.3 Find the centre of mass of a

150g and 200g be located at O, A and B be uniform L-shaped lamina (a thin flat plate)

respectively. Then, with dimensions as shown. The mass of
the lamina is 3 kg.

m1x1 + m2x2 + m3x
X = 3

m1 + m2 + m3 Answer  Choosing the X and Y axes as shown
in Fig. 6.11 we have the coordinates of the

 100 (0) +150(0.5) + 200(0.25) g m
=   vertices of the L-shaped lamina as given in the

(100 +150 + 200) g figure. We can think of the
L-shape to consist of 3 squares each of length
1m. The mass of each square is 1kg, since the

= 75 + 50
m = 125

m = 5
m

450 450 18 lamina is uniform. The centres of mass C , C
1 2

and C  of the squares are, by symmetry, their
3

 100(0) +150(0) + 200(0.25 3) g m geometric centres and have coordinates (1/2,1/2),
  

Y = (3/2,1/2), (1/2,3/2) respectively. We take the
450 g

masses of the squares to be concentrated at
these points. The centre of mass of the whole

= 50 3 3 1
m = m = m L shape (X, Y) is the centre of mass of these

450 9 3 3 mass points.
The centre of mass C is shown in the figure.

Note that it is not the geometric centre of the
triangle OAB. Why? ⊳

u Example 6.2  Find the centre of mass of a
triangular lamina.

Answer  The lamina (∆LMN ) may be subdivided
into narrow strips each parallel to the base (MN)
as shown in Fig. 6.10

Fig. 6.11

Hence

[1(1/2) +1(3/2) +1(1/2)]kg m
X = 5

( + + )  = m
Fig. 6.10 1 1 1 kg 6

By symmetry each strip has its centre of
 [1(1/2) + 1(1/2) + 1(3/2)]  kg m

=   
mass at its midpoint. If we join the midpoint of Y
all the strips we get the median LP. The centre ( = 5

m
1 + 1 + 1) kg 6

of mass of the triangle as a whole therefore, has The centre of mass of the L-shape lies on
to lie on the median LP. Similarly, we can argue the line OD. We could have guessed this without
that it lies on the median MQ and NR. This calculations. Can you tell why? Suppose, the
means the centre of mass lies on the point of three squares that make up the L shaped lamina

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 99

of Fig. 6.11 had different masses. How will you Thus, the total mass of a system of particles
then determine the centre of mass of the lamina? times the acceleration of its centre of mass is
⊳ the vector sum of all the forces acting on the

system of particles.
6.3  MOTION OF CENTRE OF MASS Note when we talk of the force F1 on the first

Equipped with the definition of the centre of particle, it is not a single force, but the vector
mass, we are now in a position to discuss its sum of all the forces on the first particle; likewise
physical importance for a system of n particles. for the second particle etc. Among these forces
We may rewrite Eq.(6.4d) as on each particle there will be external forces

exerted by bodies outside the system and also
MR = ∑mi ri =m1r1 + m2r2 + ... + mnrn (6.7) internal forces exerted by the particles on one
Differentiating the two sides of the equation another. We know from Newton’s third law that

with respect to time we get these internal forces occur in equal and opposite

dR dr pairs and in the sum of forces of Eq. (6.10), their
1 dr2 dr

M = m1 + m + ... + m n
2 n contribution is zero. Only the external forces

dt dt dt dt
contribute to the equation. We can then rewrite
Eq. (6.10) as

or
MA = F

M V = m ext (6.11)
1v1 + m2v2 + ... + mnvn (6.8)

where Fext  represents the sum of all external
where  v1 (= dr1 /dt )  is the velocity of the first

forces acting on the particles of the system.

particle v2 (= dr 2 dt ) is the velocity of the Eq. (6.11) states that the centre of mass of
a system of particles moves as if all the mass

second particle etc. and V = dR/dt  is the of the system was concentrated at the centre
velocity of the centre of mass. Note that we of mass and all the external forces were
assumed the masses m , m , ... etc. do not

1 2 applied at that point.
change in time. We have therefore, treated them Notice, to determine the motion of the centre
as constants in differentiating the equations of mass no knowledge of internal forces of the
with respect to time. system of particles is required; for this purpose

Differentiating Eq.(6.8) with respect to time, we need to know only the external forces.
we obtain To obtain Eq. (6.11) we did not need to specify

the nature of the system of particles. The system
dV dv1 dv2 dv

M = m1 + m may be a collection of particles in which there
2 + ... + m n

n
dt dt dt dt may be all kinds of internal motions, or it may

or be a rigid body which has either pure
translational motion or a combination of

MA = m1a1 + m2a2 + ... + mnan (6.9)
translational and rotational motion. Whatever

where a1 (= dv1 /dt )  is the acceleration of the is the system and the motion of its individual
particles, the centre of mass moves according

first particle,  a2 (= dv2 /dt )  is the acceleration to Eq. (6.11).
Instead of treating extended bodies as single

of the second particle etc. and  A (= dV /dt )  is
particles as we have done in earlier chapters,

the acceleration of the centre of mass of the we can now treat them as systems of particles.
system of particles. We can obtain the translational component of

Now, from Newton’s second law, the force their motion, i.e. the motion of the centre of mass
acting on the first particle is given by F1 = m1a1 . of the system, by taking the mass of the whole

The force acting on the second particle is given system to be concentrated at the centre of mass
and all the external forces on the system to be

by F2 = m2a2 and so on. Eq. (6.9) may be written
acting at the centre of mass.

as This is the procedure that we followed earlier
MA = F1 + F2 + ... + Fn (6.10) in analysing forces on bodies and solving

2024-25



100 PHYSICS

problems without explicitly outlining and where F is the force on the particle. Let us
justifying the procedure. We now realise that in consider a system of n particles with masses m ,

1

earlier studies we assumed, without saying so, m ,...m respectively and velocities v
2 n 1,v2,.......vn

that rotational motion and/or internal motion
respectively. The particles may be interacting

of the particles were either absent or negligible.
and have external forces acting on them. The

We no longer need to do this. We have not only
found the justification of the procedure we linear momentum of the first particle is m1v1 ,
followed earlier; but we also have found how to of the second particle is m2v2  and so on.
describe and separate the translational motion

For the system of n particles, the linear
of (1) a rigid body which may be rotating as

momentum of the system is defined to be the
well,  or (2) a system of particles with all kinds

vector sum of all individual particles of the
of internal motion.

system,

P = p1 + p2 + ... + pn

= m1v1 + m2v2 + ... + mn vn (6.14)
Comparing this with Eq. (6.8)

P = M V (6.15)
Thus, the total momentum of a system of

particles is equal to the product of the total
mass of the system and the velocity of its
centre of mass. Differentiating Eq. (6.15) with
respect to time,

dP = dV
Fig. 6.12 The centre of mass of the fragments M = MA (6.16)

dt dt
of the projectile continues along the
same parabolic path which it would Comparing Eq.(6.16) and Eq. (6.11),
have followed if there were no dP
explosion. = Fext (6.17)

dt
Figure 6.12 is a good illustration of Eq. (6.11). This is the statement of Newton’s second law

A projectile, following the usual parabolic of motion extended to a system of particles.
trajectory, explodes into fragments midway in Suppose now, that the sum of external
air. The forces leading to the explosion are forces acting on a system of particles is zero.
internal forces. They contribute nothing to the Then from Eq.(6.17)
motion of the centre of mass. The total external

dP
force, namely, the force of gravity acting on the = 0 or P  = Constant (6.18a)
body, is the same before and after the explosion. dt

The centre of mass under the influence of the Thus, when the total external force acting

external force continues, therefore, along the on a system of particles is zero, the total linear

same parabolic trajectory as it would have momentum of the system is constant. This is

followed if there were no explosion. the law of conservation of the total linear
momentum of a system of particles. Because of

6.4 LINEAR MOMENTUM OF A SYSTEM OF Eq. (6.15), this also means that when the
PARTICLES total external force on the system is zero

Let us recall that the linear momentum of a the velocity of the centre of mass remains
constant. (We assume throughout the

particle is defined as
discussion on systems of particles in this

p = m v (6.12) chapter that the total mass of the system
Let us also recall that Newton’s second law remains constant.)

written in symbolic form for a single particle is Note that on account of the internal forces,
i.e. the forces exerted by the particles on one

= dp
F (6.13)

dt another, the individual particles may have

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 101

complicated trajectories. Yet, if the total external
force acting on the system is zero, the centre of
mass moves with a constant velocity, i.e., moves
uniformly in a straight line like a free particle.

The vector Eq. (6.18a) is equivalent to three
scalar equations,

P  = c , P  = c  and P  = c (6.18 b)
x 1 y 2 z 3 (a) (b)

Here P , P  and P  are the components of the
x y z

total linear momentum vector P along the x–, y– Fig. 6.14 (a) Trajectories of two stars, S  (dotted line)
1

and z–axes respectively; c , c  and c  are
1 2 3 and S  (solid line) forming a binary

2

constants. system with their centre of mass C in
uniform motion.

(b) The same binary system, with the
centre of mass C at rest.

move back to back with their centre of mass
remaining at rest as shown in Fig.6.13 (b).

In many problems on the system of
particles, as in the above radioactive decay
problem, it is convenient to work in the centre
of mass frame rather than in the laboratory
frame of reference.

(a) (b)
In astronomy, binary (double) stars is a

common occurrence. If there are no external
forces, the centre of mass of a double star

Fig. 6.13 (a) A heavy nucleus radium (Ra) splits into
moves like a free particle, as shown in Fig.6.14

a lighter nucleus radon (Rn) and an alpha
(a). The trajectories of the two stars of equal

particle (nucleus of helium atom). The CM
of the system is in uniform motion. mass are also shown in the figure; they look

(b) The same spliting of the heavy nucleus complicated. If we go to the centre of mass
radium (Ra) with the centre of mass at frame, then we find that there the two stars
rest. The two product particles fly back are moving in a circle, about the centre of
to back. mass, which is at rest. Note that the position

of the stars have to be diametrically opposite
As an example, let us consider the to each other [Fig. 6.14(b)]. Thus in our frame

radioactive decay of a moving unstable particle, of reference, the trajectories of the stars are a

like the nucleus of radium. A radium nucleus combination of (i) uniform motion in a straight

disintegrates into a nucleus of radon and an line of the centre of mass and (ii) circular

alpha particle. The forces leading to the decay orbits of the stars about the centre of mass.

are internal to the system and the external As can be seen from the two examples,

forces on the system are negligible. So the total separating the motion of different parts of a

linear momentum of the system is the same system into motion of the centre of mass and
motion about the centre of mass is a very

before and after decay. The two particles
useful technique that helps in understanding

produced in the decay, the radon nucleus and
the motion of the system.

the alpha particle, move in different directions
in such a way that their centre of mass moves

6.5  VECTOR PRODUCT OF TWO VECTORS
along the same path along which the original
decaying radium nucleus was moving We are already familiar with vectors and their
[Fig. 6.13(a)]. use in physics. In chapter 5 (Work, Energy, Power)

If we observe the decay from the frame of we defined the scalar product of two vectors. An
reference in which the centre of mass is at rest, important physical quantity, work, is defined as
the motion of the particles involved in the decay a scalar product of two vector quantities, force
looks particularly simple; the product particles and displacement.

2024-25



102 PHYSICS

We shall now define another product of two A simpler version of the right hand rule is
vectors. This product is a vector. Two important the following : Open up your right hand palm
quantities in the study of rotational motion, and curl the fingers pointing from  a to b. Your
namely, moment of a force and angular stretched thumb points in the direction of c.
momentum, are defined as vector products. It should be remembered that there are two

angles between any two vectors  a and b . In
Definition of Vector Product Fig. 6.15 (a) or (b) they correspond to θ (as shown)
A vector product of two vectors a and b is a and (3600– θ). While applying either of the above
vector c such that rules, the rotation should be taken through the
(i) magnitude of c = c = ab sinθ  where a and b smaller angle (<1800) between  a and b. It is θ

are magnitudes of  a and b and θ is the here.
angle between the two vectors. Because of the cross (×) used to denote the

(ii) c is perpendicular to the plane containing vector product, it is also referred to as cross product.
a and b. • Note that scalar product of two vectors is

(iii) if we take a right handed screw with its head commutative as said earlier, a.b = b.a
lying in the plane of  a and b and the screw The vector product, however, is not
perpendicular to this plane, and if we turn commutative, i.e. a × b ≠ b × a
the head in the direction from  a to b, then The magnitude of both a × b and b × a is the
the tip of the screw advances in the direction same ( ab sinθ ); also, both of them are
of c. This right handed screw rule is perpendicular to the plane of  a and b. But the
illustrated in Fig. 6.15a. rotation of the right-handed screw in case of
Alternately, if one curls up the fingers of a × b  is from  a to b, whereas in case of  b × a it

right hand around a line perpendicular to the is from b to a. This means the two vectors are
plane of the vectors  a and b and if the fingers in opposite directions. We have
are curled up in the direction from a to b, then a × b = −b × a
the stretched thumb points in the direction of • Another interesting property of a vector
c, as shown in Fig. 6.15b.

product is its behaviour under reflection.
Under reflection (i.e. on taking the plane
mirror image) we have

x → −x,y → −y and z → −z . As a result all

the components of a vector change sign and

thus a → −a, b → −b . What happens to
a × b under reflection?

a × b → (−a)× (−b) = a × b
Thus, a × b does not change sign under

reflection.
• Both scalar and vector products are

distributive with respect to vector addition.
Thus,

a.(b + c) = a.b + a.c

a × (b + c) = a × b + a × c

(a) (b) • We may write c = a × b in the component
form. For this we first need to obtain some
elementary cross products:

Fig. 6.15 (a) Rule of the right handed screw for (i) a × a = 0 (0 is a null vector, i.e. a vector
defining the direction of the vector with zero magnitude)
product of two vectors.

This follows since magnitude of a × a  is
                (b) Rule of the right hand for defining the

direction of the vector product. a2 sin0° = 0 .

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 103

From this follow the results
ˆi ˆj kˆ

 (i) ˆi × ˆi = 0, ˆj × ˆj = 0, kˆ × kˆ = 0
a × b = 3 −4 5 = 7ˆi − ˆj − 5kˆ

(ii) ˆi × ˆj = kˆ −2 1 −3

Note that the magnitude of ˆi × ˆj  is sin900

Note  b × a = −7ˆi + ˆj + 5kˆ   ⊳

or 1, since î  and ĵ  both have unit

magnitude and the angle between them is 900. 6.6 ANGULAR VELOCITY AND ITS RELATION
WITH LINEAR VELOCITY

Thus, ˆi × ˆj  is a unit vector. A unit vector
In this section we shall study what is angular

perpendicular to the plane of î  and ĵ  and velocity and its role in rotational motion. We
related to them by the right hand screw rule is have seen that every particle of a rotating body

k̂ . Hence, the above result. You may verify moves in a circle. The linear velocity of the
particle is related to the angular velocity. The

similarly,
relation between these two quantities involves

ˆj × kˆ = ˆi and kˆ × ˆi = ˆj a vector product which we learnt about in the

From the rule for commutation of the cross last section.

product, it follows: Let us go back to Fig. 6.4. As said above, in
rotational motion of a rigid body about a fixed

ˆj × ˆi = −kˆ, kˆ × ˆj = −ˆi, ˆi × kˆ = −ˆj axis, every particle of the body moves in a circle,

Note if ˆi,ˆj,kˆ occur cyclically in the above

vector product relation, the vector product is

positive. If ˆi,ˆj,kˆ  do not occur in cyclic order,

the vector product is negative.
Now,

a × b = (a ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ
x i + ay j + azk) × (b ˆ

x i + by j + bzk)

= a kˆ − a b ˆj − a b ˆ + a b ˆ + a b ˆ − a b ˆ
xby x z y x k y z i z x j z yi

=(aybz−azby )i + (azbx−axbz )j + (axby−aybx )k
We have used the elementary cross products

in obtaining the above relation. The expression
for a × b  can be put in a determinant form which
is easy to remember.

ˆi ˆj kˆ

a × b = ax ay az

bx by bz

u Example 6.4  Find the scalar and vector Fig. 6.16 Rotation about a fixed axis. (A particle (P)

products of two vectors. a = of the rigid body rotating about the fixed
(z-) axis moves in a circle with centre (C)

and b = on the axis.)

Answer
which lies in a plane perpendicular to the axis

a ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ and has its centre on the axis. In Fig. 6.16 we
ib = (3i − 4 j + 5k)i(−2i + j − 3k)

= − redraw Fig. 6.4, showing a typical particle (at a
6 − 4 −15

point P) of the rigid body rotating about a fixed
= −25 axis (taken as the z-axis). The particle describes

2024-25



104 PHYSICS

a circle with a centre C on the axis. The radius and points out in the direction in which a right
of the circle is r, the perpendicular distance of handed screw would advance, if the head of the
the point P from the axis. We also show the screw is rotated with the body. (See Fig. 6.17a).
linear velocity vector v of the particle at P. It is The magnitude of this vector is ω = dθ dt
along the tangent at P to the circle.

referred as above.
Let P′ be the position of the particle after an

interval of time ∆t (Fig. 6.16). The angle PCP′

describes the angular displacement ∆θ of the
particle in time ∆t. The average angular velocity
of the particle over the interval  ∆t is ∆θ/∆t. As
∆t tends to zero (i.e. takes smaller and smaller
values), the ratio ∆θ/∆t approaches a limit which
is the instantaneous angular velocity dθ/dt of
the particle at the position P. We denote the
instantaneous angular velocity by  ω (the
Greek letter omega). We know from our study Fig. 6.17 (a) If the head of a right handed screw
of circular motion that the magnitude of linear rotates with the body, the screw
velocity  v of a particle moving in a circle is advances in the direction of the angular

related to the angular velocity of the particle ω velocity ω. If the sense (clockwise or

by the simple relation υ = ω r , where r is the anticlockwise) of rotation of the body

radius of the circle. changes, so does the direction of ω.

We observe that at any given instant the
relation  v = ω r  applies to  all particles of the
rigid body. Thus for a particle at a perpendicular
distance r   from the fixed axis, the linear velocity

i

at a given instant v  is given by
i

vi = ω ri (6.19)
The index i runs from 1 to n, where n is the

total number of particles of the body.
For particles on the axis, r = 0 , and hence

v = ω r = 0. Thus, particles on the axis are
stationary. This verifies that the axis is fixed.

Note that we use the same angular velocity
ω for all the particles. We therefore, refer to  ω
as the angular velocity of the whole body.

We have characterised pure translation of
a body by all parts of the body having the same Fig. 6.17 (b) The angular velocity vector ω is directed
velocity at any instant of time. Similarly, we along the fixed axis as shown. The linear
may characterise pure rotation by all parts of velocity of the particle at P is v = ω × r.
the body having the same angular velocity at It is  perpendicular to both ω and r and

any instant of time. Note that this is  directed along the tangent to the circle
described by the particle.

characterisation of the rotation of a rigid body
about a fixed axis is just another way of saying We shall now look at what the vector
as in Sec. 6.1 that each particle of the body moves product ω × r corresponds to. Refer to Fig.
in a circle, which lies in a plane perpendicular 6.17(b) which is a part of Fig. 6.16 reproduced
to the axis and has the centre on the axis. to show the path of the particle P. The figure

In our discussion so far the angular velocity shows the vector ω directed along the fixed (z–)
appears to be a scalar. In fact, it is a vector. We axis and also the position vector  r = OP  of the
shall not justify this fact, but we shall accept particle at P of the rigid body with respect to
it. For rotation about a fixed axis, the angular the origin O. Note that the origin is chosen to
velocity vector lies along the axis of rotation, be on the axis of rotation.

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 105

Now ω × r = ω × OP = ω × (OC + CP) If the axis of rotation is fixed, the direction

But ω of ω and hence, that of α is fixed. In this case
 × OC = 0 as ω is along OC

the vector equation reduces to a scalar equation
Hence ω × r = ω × CP

α = dω
(6.22)

The vector ω × CP is perpendicular to ω, i.e. dt

to the z-axis and also to CP, the radius of the
circle described by the particle at P. It is 6.7  TORQUE AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM
therefore, along the tangent to the circle at P.

In this section, we shall acquaint ourselves with
Also, the magnitude of  ω × CP is ω (CP) since

two physical quantities (torque and angular
ω and CP are perpendicular to each other. We momentum) which are defined as vector products
shall denote CP by r⊥  and not by r, as we did of two vectors. These as we shall see, are
earlier. especially important in the discussion of motion

Thus, ω of systems of particles, particularly rigid bodies.
 × r is a vector of magnitude ωr

⊥

and is along the tangent to the circle described
by the particle at P. The linear velocity vector v 6.7.1 Moment of force (Torque)
at P has the same magnitude and direction.

We have learnt that the motion of a rigid body,
Thus,

in general, is a combination of rotation and
v = ω × r (6.20)

translation. If the body is fixed at a point or along
In fact, the relation, Eq. (6.20), holds good

a line, it has only rotational motion. We know
even for rotation of a rigid body with one point
fixed, such as the rotation of the top [Fig. 6.6(a)]. that force is needed to change the translational

In this case r represents the position vector of state of a body, i.e. to produce linear
the particle with respect to the fixed point taken acceleration. We may then ask, what is the
as the origin. analogue of force in the case of rotational

We note that for rotation about a fixed motion? To look into the question in a concrete
axis, the direction of the vector ω does not situation let us take the example of opening or
change with time. Its magnitude may, closing of a door. A door is a rigid body which
however, change from instant to instant. For

can rotate about a fixed vertical axis passing
the more general rotation, both the
magnitude and the direction of ω may change through the hinges. What makes the door

from instant to instant. rotate? It is clear that unless a force is applied
the door does not rotate. But any force does not

6.6.1 Angular acceleration
do the job. A force applied to the hinge line

You may have noticed that we are developing cannot produce any rotation at all, whereas a
the study of rotational motion along the lines force of given magnitude applied at right angles
of the study of translational motion with which to the door at its outer edge is most effective in
we are already familiar. Analogous to the kinetic producing rotation. It is not the force alone, but
variables of linear displacement (s) and velocity how and where the force is applied is important
(v) in translational motion, we have angular in rotational motion.
displacement (θ) and angular velocity (ω) in The rotational analogue of force in linear
rotational motion. It is then natural to define motion is moment of force. It is also referred to
in rotational motion the concept of angular as torque or couple. (We shall use the words
acceleration in analogy with linear acceleration moment of force and torque interchangeably.)
defined as the time rate of change of velocity in We shall first define the moment of force for the
translational motion. We define angular special case of a single particle. Later on we
acceleration α as the time rate of change of

shall extend the concept to systems of particles
angular velocity. Thus,

including rigid bodies. We shall also relate it to
dω

α = a change in the state of rotational motion, i.e. is
(6.21)

dt angular acceleration of a rigid body.

2024-25



106 PHYSICS

of the line of action of F from the origin and
F (= F sinθ ) is the component of F in the

⊥

direction perpendicular to r. Note that τ = 0 if
r = 0, F = 0 or θ = 00 or 1800 . Thus, the moment
of a force vanishes if either the magnitude of
the force is zero, or if the line of action of the
force passes through the origin.

One may note that since  r × F is a vector
product, properties of a vector product of two
vectors apply to it. If the direction of F is
reversed, the direction of the moment of force
is reversed. If directions of both r and F are
reversed, the direction of the moment of force
remains the same.

6.7.2 Angular momentum of a particle

Just as the moment of a force is the rotational
analogue of force in linear motion, the quantity
angular momentum is the rotational analogue

Fig. 6.18 of linear momentum. We shall first define
τ = r × F, τ is perpendicular to the plane
containing r and F, and its direction is angular momentum for the special case of a

given by the right handed screw rule. single particle and look at its usefulness in the
context of single particle motion. We shall then

If a force acts on a single particle at a point extend the definition of angular momentum to

P whose position with respect to the origin O is systems of particles including rigid bodies.

given by the position vector r (Fig. 6.18), the Like moment of a force, angular momentum

moment of the force acting on the particle with is also a vector product. It could also be referred

respect to the origin O is defined as the vector to as moment of (linear) momentum. From this

product term one could guess how angular momentum

τ = r × F (6.23) is defined.

The moment of force (or torque) is a vector Consider a particle of mass m and linear

quantity. The symbol τ stands for the Greek momentum p at a position r relative to the origin

letter tau. The magnitude of τ is O. The angular momentum l of the particle with

τ = r F sinθ (6.24a) respect to the origin O is defined to be

where r is the magnitude of the position vector l = r × p (6.25a)

r, i.e. the length OP, F is the magnitude of force The magnitude of the angular momentum

F and θ is the angle between r and F as vector is

shown. l = r p sinθ (6.26a)
Moment of force has dimensions M L2 T -2. where p is the magnitude of p and θ is the angle

Its dimensions are the same as those of work between r and p. We may write
or energy. It is, however, a very different physical

l = r p  or r p                                   (6.26b)
quantity than work. Moment of a force is a ⊥ ⊥

vector, while work is a scalar. The SI unit of where r  (= r sinθ) is the perpendicular distance
⊥

moment of force is newton metre (N m). The of the directional line of  p from the origin and
magnitude of the moment of force may be

p (= p sinθ )  is the component of p in a direction
written ⊥

perpendicular to r. We expect the angular
τ = (r sinθ )F = r F (6.24b)

⊥ momentum to be zero (l = 0), if the linear

or τ = r F sinθ = rF⊥ (6.24c) momentum vanishes (p = 0), if the particle is at
the origin (r = 0), or if the directional line of  p

where r  = r sinθ is the perpendicular distance
⊥ passes through the origin θ = 00 or 1800.

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 107

The physical quantities, moment of a force
and angular momentum, have an important An experiment with the bicycle rim

relation between them. It is the rotational
Take a

analogue of the relation between force and linear
bicycle rim

momentum. For deriving the relation in the and extend
context of a single particle, we differentiate its axle on
l  = r × p with respect to time, both sides.

T ie two
dl d

= (r × p) s t r i n g s
dt dt at both ends
Applying the product rule for differentiation A and B,

to the right hand side, as shown
in the

d dr dp
(r × p) = × p + r × a d j o i n i n g

dt dt dt figure.  Hold

Now, the velocity of the particle is v = dr/dt both the

and p = m v s t r i n g s
Initially After

together in
dr

Because of this × p = v × m v = one hand such that the rim is vertical. If you
0,

dt leave one string, the rim will tilt. Now keeping

as the vector product of two parallel vectors the rim in vertical position with both the strings
in one hand, put the wheel in fast rotation

vanishes. Further, since dp / dt = F,
around the axle with the other hand. Then leave

dp one string, say B, from your hand, and observe
r × = r × F = t

dt what happens.
The rim keeps rotating in a vertical plane

d and the plane of rotation turns around the string
Hence  (r × p) = τ

dt A which you are holding. We say that the axis
of rotation of the rim or equivalently

or  (6.27) its angular momentum precesses about the
string A.

Thus, the time rate of change of the angular The rotating rim gives rise to an angular
momentum of a particle is equal to the torque momentum. Determine the direction of this
acting on it. This is the rotational analogue of angular momentum. When you are holding the

the equation F = dp/dt, which expresses rotating rim with string A, a torque is generated.

Newton’s second law for the translational motion (We leave it to you to find out how the torque is
generated and what its direction is.) The effect

of a single particle.
of the torque on the angular momentum is to
make it precess around an axis perpendicular

Torque and angular momentum for a system to both the angular momentum and the torque.
of particles Verify all these statements.

To get the total angular momentum of a system
of particles about a given point we need to add
vectorially the angular momenta of individual
particles. Thus, for a system of n particles, particle has mass m  and velocity v ) We may

i i

write the total angular momentum of a system
of particles as

(6.25b)
The angular momentum of the ith   particle

is given by
l  = r  × This is a generalisation of the definition of

p
i i i

where r  is the position vector of the ith particle angular momentum (Eq. 6.25a) for a single
i

with respect to a given origin and p = (m v ) is particle to a system of particles.
i i

the linear momentum of the particle. (The Using Eqs. (6.23) and (6.25b), we get

2024-25



108 PHYSICS

dL d d Note that like Eq.(6.17), Eq.(6.28b) holds
) l

= ( l = ∑ = ∑ τ (6.28a) good for any system of particles, whether it is a
dt dt dt

i i rigid body or its individual particles have all
where τ is the torque acting on the ith particle;

i kinds of internal motion.

τ = r × F
i i i Conservation of angular momentum

The force F on the ith particle is the vector
i 

If τ = 0, Eq. (6.28b) reduces to
ext ext 

F
sum of external forces i  acting on the particle dL

= 0
and the internal forces int

F  exerted on it by the dt
i

other particles of the system. We may therefore or         L = constant. (6.29a)
separate the contribution of the external and Thus, if the total external torque on a system
the internal forces to the total torque of particles is zero, then the total angular

momentum of the system is conserved, i.e.
τ  =   ∑   τ i = ∑ r × F remains constant. Eq. (6.29a) is equivalent to

i i  as
i i three scalar equations,

τ  =  τ  K  and L  = K (6.29 b)
e  x t  +  τ L  = K , L  =

int , x 1 y 2 z 3

Here K , K  and K  are constants; L , L  and
1 2 3 x y

∑ ext  the components of the total angular
where    τ = r × F L  are

z
ext i i

i momentum vector L along the x,y and z axes
int respectively. The statement that the total

and τ
int = ∑ r × F

i i angular momentum is conserved means that
i

each of these three components is conserved.
We shall assume not only Newton’s third law

Eq. (6.29a) is the rotational analogue of
of motion, i.e. the forces between any two particles

Eq. (6.18a), i.e. the conservation law of the total
of the system are equal and opposite, but also that

linear momentum for a system of  particles.
these forces are directed along the line joining the Like Eq. (6.18a), it has applications in many
two particles. In this case the contribution of the practical situations. We shall look at a few of
internal forces to the total torque on the system is the interesting applications later on in
zero, since the torque resulting from each action- this chapter.
reaction pair of forces is zero. We thus have, τ  =

int

0 and therefore τ  = τ . u
 ext Example 6.5  Find the torque of a force  

Since τ  =   ∑   τ e force acts on
i , it follows from Eq. (6.28a) +  –  about the origin. Th

that a particle whose position vector is  .

dL
= τ

ext (6.28 b) Answer  Here  r = ˆi − ˆj + kˆ
dt

    and 
Thus, the time rate of the total angular F = 7ˆi + 3ˆj − 5kˆ .

momentum of a system of particles about a We shall use the determinant rule to find the

point (taken as the origin of our frame of torque τ = r × F

reference) is equal to the sum of the external
torques (i.e. the torques due to external forces)
acting on the system taken about the same
point. Eq. (6.28 b) is the generalisation of the
single particle case of Eq. (6.23) to a system of
particles. Note that when we have only one or ⊳

particle, there are no internal forces or torques.
Eq.(6.28 b) is the rotational analogue of Example 6.6  Show that the angular

momentum about any point of a single
d u
P

= F oving with constant velocity
ext (6.17) particle m

dt remains constant throughout the motion.

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 109

Answer Let the particle with velocity v  be at acceleration nor angular acceleration. This means
point P  at some instant t. We want to calculate (1) the total force, i.e. the vector sum of the
the angular momentum of the particle about an forces, on the rigid body is zero;
arbitrary point O.

n

F + F + ... + F = ∑F = 0
1 2 n i (6.30a)

i =1

If the total force on the body is zero, then
the total linear momentum of the body does
not change with time. Eq. (6.30a) gives the
condition for the translational equilibrium
of the body.

(2) The total torque, i.e. the vector sum of the
torques on the rigid body is zero,

n

τ  +   τ  +   . . .  +  τ   =   ∑    τ = 0
n i (6.30b)

1 2
Fig 6.19 i =1

If the total torque on the rigid body is zero,
The angular momentum is l = r × mv. Its the total angular momentum of the body does

magnitude is mvr sinθ, where θ is the angle not change with time. Eq. (6.30 b) gives the
between r and v as shown in Fig. 6.19. Although

condition for the rotational equilibrium of the
the particle changes position with time, the line

body.
of direction of v remains the same and hence

One may raise a question, whether the
OM = r sin θ. is a constant.

Further, the direction of l is perpendicular rotational equilibrium condition [Eq. 6.30(b)]

to the plane of r and v. It is into the page of the remains valid, if the origin with respect to which

figure.This direction does not change with time. the torques are taken is shifted. One can show

Thus, l remains the same in magnitude and that if the translational equilibrium condition
direction and is therefore conserved. Is there [Eq. 6.30(a)] holds for a rigid body, then such a
any external torque on the particle? ⊳ shift of origin does not matter, i.e. the rotational

equilibrium condition is independent of the
6.8  EQUILIBRIUM OF A RIGID BODY location of the origin about which the torques

are taken. Example 6.7 gives a proof of this result
We are now going to concentrate on the motion
of rigid bodies rather than on the motion of in a special case of a couple, i.e. two forces

general systems of particles. acting on a rigid body in translational

We shall recapitulate what effect the equilibrium. The generalisation of this result to

external forces have on a rigid body. (Henceforth n forces is left as an exercise.
we shall omit the adjective ‘external’ because Eq. (6.30a) and Eq. (6.30b), both, are vector
unless stated otherwise, we shall deal with only equations. They are equivalent to three scalar
external forces and torques.) The forces change equations each. Eq. (6.30a) corresponds to
the translational state of the motion of the rigid n n n

body, i.e. they change its total l inear ∑ F = 0
ix , ∑ F = 0 F =

iy  and ∑ 0
iz   (6.31a)

momentum in accordance with Eq. (6.17). But i =1 i =1 i =1

this is not the only effect the forces have. The where F , F  and F  are respectively the x, y and
ix iy iz

total torque on the body may not vanish. Such z components of the forces F . Similarly, Eq.
i

a torque changes the rotational state of motion (6.30b) is equivalent to three scalar equations
of the rigid body, i.e. it changes the total angular n n

momentum of the body in accordance with ∑τ = 0
ix , ∑ τ = 0

iy  and       (6.31b)
Eq. (6.28 b). i =1 i =1

A rigid body is said to be in mechanical where τ , τ   and  τ are respectively the x, y and
ix iy iz 

equilibrium, if both its linear momentum and z components of the torque τ  .
i

angular momentum are not changing with time, Eq. (6.31a) and (6.31b) give six independent

or equivalently, the body has neither linear conditions to be satisfied for mechanical

2024-25



110 PHYSICS

equilibrium of a rigid body. In a number of
problems all the forces acting on the body are
coplanar. Then we need only three conditions
to be satisfied for mechanical equilibrium. Two
of these conditions correspond to translational
equilibrium; the sum of the components of the
forces along any two perpendicular axes in the
plane must be zero. The third condition
corresponds to rotational equilibrium. The sum
of the components of the torques along any axis Fig. 6.20 (b)

perpendicular to the plane of the forces must
be zero. The force at B in Fig. 6.20(a) is reversed in

The conditions of equilibrium of a rigid body Fig. 6.20(b). Thus, we have the same rod with
may be compared with those for a particle, which two forces of equal magnitude but acting in

opposite diretions applied perpendicular to the
we considered in earlier chapters. Since rod, one at end A and the other at end B. Here
consideration of rotational motion does not apply the moments of both the forces are equal, but
to a particle, only the conditions for translational they are not opposite; they act in the same sense
equilibrium (Eq. 6.30 a) apply to a particle. Thus, and cause anticlockwise rotation of the rod.  The
for equilibrium of a particle the vector sum of total force on the body is zero; so the body is in
all the forces on it must be zero. Since all these translational equilibrium; but it is not in
forces act on the single particle, they must be rotational equilibrium. Although the rod is not
concurrent. Equilibrium under concurrent fixed in any way, it undergoes pure rotation (i.e.
forces was discussed in the earlier chapters. rotation without translation).

A pair of forces of equal magnitude but acting
A body may be in partial equilibrium, i.e., it in opposite directions with different lines of

may be in translational equilibrium and not in action is known as a couple or torque. A couple
rotational equilibrium, or it may be in rotational produces rotation without translation.
equilibrium and not in translational When we open the lid of a bottle by turning
equilibrium. it, our fingers are applying a couple to the lid

Consider a light (i.e. of negligible mass) rod [Fig. 6.21(a)]. Another known example is a
(AB) as shown in Fig. 6.20(a). At the two ends (A compass needle in the earth’s magnetic field as
and B) of which two parallel forces, both  equal shown in the Fig. 6.21(b). The earth’s magnetic
in magnitude and acting along same direction field exerts equal forces on the north and south

poles. The force on the North Pole is towards
are applied perpendicular to the rod. the north, and the force on the South Pole is

toward the south. Except when the needle points
in the north-south direction; the two forces do
not have the same line of action. Thus there is
a couple acting on the needle due to the earth’s
magnetic field.

Fig. 6.20 (a)

Let C be the midpoint of AB, CA = CB = a.
the moment of the forces at A and B will both
be equal in magnitude (aF ), but opposite in
sense as shown. The net moment on the rod will
be zero. The system will be in rotational
equilibrium, but it will not be in translational

equilibrium; ∑F ≠ 0 Fig. 6.21(a) Our fingers apply a couple to turn
the lid.

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 111

length. This point is called the fulcrum. A see-
saw on the children’s playground is a typical
example of a lever. Two forces F1 and F2, parallel
to each other and usually perpendicular to the
lever, as shown here, act on the lever at
distances d1 and d2 respectively from the fulcrum
as shown in Fig. 6.23.

Fig. 6.21(b) The Earth’s magnetic field exerts equal
and opposite forces on the poles of a Fig. 6.23
compass needle. These two  forces form
a couple. The lever is a system in mechanical

equilibrium. Let R be the reaction of the support
uExample 6.7  Show that moment of a at the fulcrum; R is directed opposite to the

couple does not depend on the point about forces  F1 and F
which you take the moments. 2. For translational equilibrium,

R – F1 – F2 = 0 (i)
Answer

For considering rotational equilibrium we
take the moments about the fulcrum; the sum
of moments must be zero,

d1F1 – d2F2 = 0 (ii)
Normally the anticlockwise (clockwise)

moments are taken to be positive (negative). Note
R acts at the fulcrum itself and has zero moment

Fig. 6.22 about the fulcrum.
In the case of the lever force F1 is usually

Consider a couple as shown in Fig. 6.22 some weight to be lifted. It is called the load and
acting on a rigid body. The forces F and -F act its distance from the fulcrum d1 is called the
respectively at points B and A. These points have load arm. Force F2 is the effort applied to lift the
position vectors r1 and r2 with respect to origin load; distance d2 of the effort from the fulcrum
O. Let us take the moments of the forces about is the effort arm.
the origin. Eq. (ii) can be written as

The moment of the couple = sum of the d F
1 1 = d2 F2 (6.32a)

moments of the two forces making the couple or load arm × load = effort arm× effort
  

= r1 × (–F) + r2 × F The above equation expresses the principle
  

= r2 × F – r1 × F of moments for a lever. Incidentally the ratio
  

= (r2–r1) × F F
 1/F2 is called the Mechanical Advantage (M.A.);

But r1 + AB = r2, and hence AB = r2 – r1. F
The moment of the couple, therefore, is 1 d

= 2
M.A. = F 3 b

2 d (6. 2 )
AB 1

× F.
 

Clearly this is independent of the origin, the If the effort arm d2 is larger than the load
point about which we took the moments of the arm, the mechanical advantage is greater than
forces. ⊳ one. Mechanical advantage greater than one

means that a small effort can be used to lift a
6.8.1 Principle of moments large load. There are several examples of a lever
An ideal lever is essentially a light (i.e. of around you besides the see-saw. The beam of a
negligible mass) rod pivoted at a point along its balance is a lever. Try to find more such

2024-25



112 PHYSICS

examples and identify the fulcrum, the effort and The CG of the cardboard is so located that
effort arm, and the load and the load arm of the the total torque on it due to the forces m g, m g

1 2

lever in each case. ….  etc. is zero.
You may easily show that the principle of If  r  is the position vector of the ith particle

i

moment holds even when the parallel forces  F of an extended body with respect to its CG, then
1

and F are not perpendicular, but act at some the torque about the CG, due to the force of
2 

angle, to the lever. gravity on the particle  is τ = r  × m g. The total
i i i 

gravitational torque about the CG is zero, i.e.
6.8.2 Centre of gravity

τ = ∑ τ =
g ∑ r × m g = 0

i i (6.33)
i

Many of you may have the experience of We may therefore, define the CG of a body
balancing your notebook on the tip of a finger. as that point where the total gravitational torque
Figure 6.24 illustrates a similar experiment that on the body is zero.
you can easily perform. Take an irregular- We notice that in Eq. (6.33), g is the same
shaped cardboard having mass M and a narrow for all particles, and hence it comes out of the
tipped object like a pencil. You can locate by trial summation. This gives, since g is non-zero,
and error a point G on the cardboard where it
can be balanced on the tip of the pencil. (The ∑ m r  = 0. Remember that the position vectors

i i

cardboard remains horizontal in this position.) (r ) are taken with respect to the CG. Now, in
i

This point of balance is the centre of gravity (CG) accordance with the reasoning given below
of the cardboard. The tip of the pencil provides Eq. (6.4a) in Sec. 6.2, if the sum is zero, the origin
a vertically upward force due to which the must be the centre of mass of the body. Thus,
cardboard is in mechanical equilibrium. As the centre of gravity of the body coincides with
shown in the Fig. 6.24, the reaction of the tip is the centre of mass in uniform gravity or gravity-
equal and opposite to Mg and hence the
cardboard is in translational equilibrium. It is
also in rotational equilibrium; if it were not so,
due to the unbalanced torque it would tilt and
fall. There are torques on the card board due to
the forces of gravity like m g, m g ….  etc, acting

1 2

on the individual particles that make up the
cardboard.

Fig. 6.25 Determining the centre of gravity of a body
Fig. 6.24 Balancing a cardboard on the tip of a of irregular shape. The centre of gravity G

pencil. The point of support, G, is the lies on the vertical AA  through the point
1

centre of gravity. of suspension of the body A.

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 113

free space. We note that this is true because = 30 cm, PG = 5 cm, AK1= BK2 = 10 cm and K1G =
the body being small,  g does not K2G = 25 cm. Also, W= weight of the rod = 4.00
vary from one point of the body to the other. If kg and W1= suspended load = 6.00 kg;
the body is so extended that g varies from part R1 and R2 are the normal reactions of the
to part of the body, then the centre of gravity support at the knife edges.
and centre of mass will not coincide. Basically, For translational equilibrium of the rod,
the two are different concepts. The centre of R1+R2 –W1 –W = 0 (i)

  

mass has nothing to do with gravity. It depends Note W1 and W act vertically down and R1
only on the distribution of mass of the body. and R2 act vertically up.

In Sec. 6.2 we found out the position of the For considering rotational equilibrium, we
centre of mass of several regular, homogeneous take moments of the forces. A convenient point
objects. Obviously the method used there gives to take moments about is G. The moments of
us also the centre of gravity of these bodies, if R2 and W1 are anticlockwise (+ve), whereas the
they are small enough. moment of R1 is clockwise (-ve).

Figure 6.25 illustrates another way of For rotational equilibrium,
determining the CG of an irregular shaped body –R1 (K1G) + W1 (PG) + R2 (K2G) = 0 (ii)
like a cardboard. If you suspend the body from It is given that W = 4.00g N and W1 = 6.00g
some point like A, the vertical line through A N, where g = acceleration due to gravity. We
passes through the CG. We mark the vertical take g = 9.8 m/s2.
AA1. We then suspend the body through other With numerical values inserted, from (i)
points like B and C. The intersection of the R1 + R2 – 4.00g – 6.00g = 0
verticals gives the CG. Explain why the method or R1 + R2 = 10.00g  N (iii)
works. Since the body is small enough, the                = 98.00 N
method allows us to determine also its centre From (ii), – 0.25 R1 + 0.05 W1 + 0.25 R2 = 0
of mass. or R1 – R2 = 1.2g  N = 11.76 N (iv)

From (iii) and (iv), R1 = 54.88 N,
uExample 6.8   A metal bar 70 cm long and R2 = 43.12 N

4.00 kg in mass supported on two knife- Thus the reactions of the support are about
edges placed 10 cm from each end. A 6.00 55 N at K1 and 43 N at K2.   ⊳
kg load is suspended at 30 cm from one
end. Find the reactions at the knife-edges. uExample 6.9  A 3m long ladder weighing
(Assume the bar to be of uniform cross 20 kg leans on a frictionless wall. Its feet
section and homogeneous.) rest on the floor 1 m from the wall as shown

in Fig.6.27. Find the reaction forces of the
Answer wall and the floor.

Answer

Fig. 6.26

Figure 6.26 shows the rod AB, the positions
of the knife edges K1 and K2 , the centre of
gravity of the rod at G and the suspended load
at P.

Note the weight of the rod W acts at its
centre of gravity G. The rod is uniform in cross
section and homogeneous; hence G is at the
centre of the rod; AB = 70 cm. AG = 35 cm, AP Fig. 6.27

2024-25



114 PHYSICS

The ladder AB is 3 m long, its foot A is at from the axis, the linear velocity is υi = riω . The
distance AC = 1 m from the wall. From

kinetic energy of motion of this particle is
Pythagoras theorem, BC = 2 2  m. The forces

1
on the ladder are its weight W acting at its centre 2 1

k 2
i = m iυi = m 2

iri ω
of gravity D, reaction forces F1 and F2 of the wall 2 2

and the floor respectively. Force F1 is where m
i is the mass of the particle. The total

perpendicular to the wall, since the wall is kinetic energy K of the body is then given by
frictionless. Force F2  is resolved into two the sum of the kinetic energies of individual
components, the normal reaction N and the particles,
force of friction F. Note that F prevents the ladder n 1 n

from sliding away from the wall and is therefore K = ∑k 2 2
i = ∑ (miri ω )

i =1 2 i =1
directed toward the wall.

For translational equilibrium, taking the Here n is the number of particles in the body.
forces in the vertical direction, Note ω is the same for all particles. Hence, taking

N – W = 0 (i) ω out of the sum,
Taking the forces in the horizontal direction, 1 n

K = ω2 (∑m 2
F – F1 = 0 (ii) iri )

2 i =1
For rotational equilibrium, taking the

moments of the forces about A, We define a new parameter characterising
the rigid body, called the moment of inertia I ,

2 2 F1 − (1/2) W = 0 (iii) given by
Now W = 20 g = 20 × 9.8 N = 196.0 N n

I = ∑m 2
irFrom (i) N = 196.0 N i (6.34)

i =1

From (iii) F1 = W 4 2 = 196.0/4 2 = 34.6 N With this definition,
1

From (ii) F = F1 = 34.6 N K = Iω2
(6.35)

2

               F = 2 2
2 F + N = 199.0 N Note that the parameter I is independent of

the magnitude of the angular velocity. It is a
The force F2 makes an angle α with the characteristic of the rigid body and the axis

horizontal, about which it rotates.
Compare Eq. (6.35) for the kinetic energy of

tanα = N F = 4 2 , α = tan−1(4 2) ≈ 80   ⊳
a rotating body with the expression for the
kinetic energy of a body in linear (translational)

6.9  MOMENT OF INERTIA
motion,

We have already mentioned that we are
1

developing the study of rotational motion parallel K = m υ2

to the study of translational motion with which 2

we are familiar. We have yet to answer one major Here, m is the mass of the body and v is its
velocity. We have already noted the analogy

question in this connection. What is the between angular velocity ω (in respect of
analogue of mass in rotational motion? We shall rotational motion about a fixed axis) and linear
attempt to answer this question in the present velocity v (in respect of linear motion). It is then
section. To keep the discussion simple, we shall evident that the parameter, moment of inertia
consider rotation about a fixed axis only. Let us I, is the desired rotational analogue of mass in
try to get an expression for the kinetic energy of linear motion. In rotation (about a fixed axis),
a rotating body. We know that for a body rotating the moment of inertia plays a similar role as
about a fixed axis, each particle of the body moves mass does in linear motion.
in a circle with linear velocity given by Eq. (6.19). We now apply the definition Eq. (6.34), to
(Refer to Fig. 6.16). For a particle at a distance calculate the moment of inertia in two simple cases.

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 115

(a) Consider a thin ring of radius R and mass change in its rotational motion, it can be
M, rotating in its own plane around its centre regarded as a measure of rotational inertia of
with angular velocity ω. Each mass element the body; it is a measure of the way in which
of the ring is at a distance R from the axis, different parts of the body are distributed at
and moves with a speed Rω.  The kinetic different distances from the axis. Unlike the
energy is therefore, mass of a body, the moment of inertia is not a

1 fixed quantity but depends on distribution of
2 1

K = Mυ = MR2ω2 mass about the axis of rotation, and the
2 2 orientation and position of the axis of rotation

Comparing with Eq. (6.35) we get I = MR 2
with respect to the body as a whole. As a

for the ring. measure of the way in which the mass of a
rotating rigid body is distributed with respect to
the axis of rotation, we can define a new
parameter, the radius of gyration. It is related
to the moment of inertia and the total mass of
the body.

Notice from the Table 6.1 that in all
cases, we can write I = Mk2, where k has
the dimension of length. For a rod, about
the perpendicular axis at its midpoint,
k2 = L2 12, i.e.  k = L 12 . Similarly, k = R/2
for the circular disc about its diameter. The
length k is a geometric property of the body and
axis of rotation. It is called the radius of

Fig. 6.28 A light rod of length l with a pair of
gyration. The radius of gyration of a body

masses rotating about an axis through
the centre of mass of the system and about an axis may be defined as the distance
perpendicular to the rod. The total mass from the axis of a mass point whose mass is
of the system is M. equal to the mass of the whole body and whose

moment of inertia is equal to the moment of
(b) Next, take a rigid rod of negligible mass of inertia of the body about the axis.

length of length l with a pair of small masses, Thus, the moment of inertia of a rigid body
rotating about an axis through the centre of depends on the mass of the body, its shape and
mass perpendicular to the rod (Fig. 6.28). size; distribution of mass about the axis of
Each mass M/2 is at a distance l/2 from rotation, and the position and orientation of the
the axis. The moment of inertia of the masses axis of rotation.
is therefore given by From the definition, Eq. (6.34), we can infer

(M/2) (l/2)2 + (M/2)(l/2)2 that the dimensions of moments of inertia are
Thus, for the pair of masses, rotating about ML2 and its SI units are kg m2.

the axis through the centre of mass The property of this extremely important
perpendicular to the rod quantity I, as a measure of rotational inertia of

I = Ml 2 / 4
the body, has been put to a great practical use.

Table 6.1 simply gives the moment of inertia of
various familiar regular shaped bodies about The machines, such as steam engine and the
specific axes. (The derivations of these automobile engine, etc., that produce rotational
expressions are beyond the scope of this motion have a disc with a large moment of
textbook and you will study them in higher inertia, called a flywheel. Because of its large
classes.) moment of inertia, the flywheel resists the

As the mass of a body resists a change in its sudden increase or decrease of the speed of the
state of linear motion, it is a measure of its inertia vehicle. It allows a gradual change in the speed
in linear motion. Similarly, as the moment of and prevents jerky motions, thereby ensuring
inertia about a given axis of rotation resists a a smooth ride for the passengers on the vehicle.

2024-25



116 PHYSICS

Table 6.1 Moments of inertia of some regular shaped bodies about specific axes

Z Body Axis Figure I

(1) Thin circular Perpendicular to M R 2

ring, radius R plane, at centre

(2) Thin circular Diameter M R2/2
ring, radius R

(3) Thin rod, Perpendicular to M L2/12
length  L rod, at mid point

(4) Circular disc, Perpendicular to M R2/2
radius R disc at centre

(5) Circular disc, Diameter M R2/4
radius R

(6) Hollow cylinder, Axis of cylinder M R2

radius R

(7) Solid cylinder, Axis of cylinder M R2/2
radius R

(8) Solid sphere, Diameter 2 M R2/5
radius R

6.10 KINEMATICS OF ROTATIONAL MOTION translation. We wish to take this analogy further.
ABOUT A FIXED AXIS In doing so we shall restrict the discussion only

We have already indicated the analogy between to rotation about fixed axis. This case of motion
rotational motion and translational motion. For involves only one degree of freedom, i.e., needs
example, the angular velocity ω plays the same only one independent variable to describe the
role in rotation as the linear velocity v in motion. This in translation corresponds to linear

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 117

motion. This section is limited only to kinematics.
We shall turn to dynamics in later sections.

We recall that for specifying the angular
displacement of the rotating body we take any
particle like P (Fig.6.29) of the body. Its angular
displacement θ in the plane it moves is the
angular displacement of the whole body; θ is
measured from a fixed direction in the plane of
motion of P, which we take to be the x′-axis,
chosen parallel to the x-axis. Note, as shown,
the axis of rotation is the z – axis and the plane
of the motion of the particle is the x - y plane.
Fig. 6.29 also shows θ0, the angular
displacement at t = 0.

We also recall that the angular velocity is
the time rate of change of angular displacement,
ω = dθ/dt. Note since the axis of rotation is fixed,
there is no need to treat angular velocity as a Fig.6.29 Specifying the angular position of a rigid

vector. Further, the angular acceleration, α = body.

dω/dt. u Example 6.10 Obtain Eq. (6.36) from first
The kinematical quantities in rotational principles.

motion, angular displacement (θ), angular
velocity (ω) and angular acceleration (α) Answer   The angular acceleration is uniform,
respectively are analogous to kinematic hence
quantities in linear motion, displacement (x ),

dω
velocity (v) and acceleration (a). We know the = α = constant (i)
kinematical equations of linear motion with dt

uniform (i.e. constant) acceleration: Integrating this equation,
v = v0 + at (a)

ω = ∫ α dt + c
1

x = x + υ t + at2
0 0 (b)    = α t + c (as α is constant)

2
At t = 0,  ω = ω

(c) 0 (given)
υ2 = υ2

0 + 2ax From (i) we get at t = 0, ω = c = ω0
Thus, ω = αt + ω0  as required.

where x0 = initial displacement and v0= initial With the definition of ω = dθ/dt we may
velocity. The word ‘initial’ refers to values of the integrate Eq. (6.36) to get Eq. (6.37). This
quantities at t = 0 derivation and the derivation of Eq. (6.38) is left

The corresponding kinematic equations for as an exercise.
rotational motion with uniform angular
acceleration are:

uExample 6.11  The angular speed of a
motor wheel is increased from 1200 rpm to

ω = ω0 + αt (6.36) 3120 rpm in 16 seconds. (i) What is its
angular acceleration, assuming the

θ = θ + ω 1
t + α 2

t (6.37) acceleration to be uniform? (ii) How many
0 0

2 revolutions does the engine make during
and ω2 = ω 2 2α(θ –θ ) (6.38) this time?

0 + 0

Answer
where θ0= initial angular displacement of the (i) We shall use ω = ω0 + αt
rotating body, and ω0 = initial angular velocity ω  =  initial angular speed in rad/s
of the body. 0

2024-25



118 PHYSICS

=  2π × angular speed in rev/s It is, however, necessary that these
correspondences are established on sound

2π × angular speed in rev/min dynamical considerations. This is what we now
=  

60 s/min turn to.
Before we begin, we note a simplification

2π ×1200 that arises in the case of rotational motion
=  rad/s

60 about a fixed axis. Since the axis is fixed, only

= 40 those components of torques, which are along
π  rad/s

the direction of the fixed axis need to be
Similarly ω = final angular speed in rad/s

considered in our discussion. Only these
2π × 3120 components can cause the body to rotate about

= rad/s
60 the axis. A component of the torque

perpendicular to the axis of rotation will tend to
= 2π × 52 rad/s turn the axis from its position. We specifically
= 104 π rad/s assume that there will arise necessary forces of

constraint to cancel the effect of the
∴ Angular acceleration perpendicular components of the (external)

torques, so that the fixed position of the axis
ω −ω will be maintained. The perpendicular

0
α = = 4 π  rad/s2

components of the torques, therefore need not
t

be taken into account. This means that for our
The angular acceleration of the engine calculation of torques on a rigid body:

= 4π rad/s2
(1) We need to consider only those forces that

(ii) The angular displacement in time t is lie in planes perpendicular to the axis.
given by Forces which are parallel to the axis will give

torques perpendicular to the axis and need
θ = ω 1 2

0t + α t not be taken into account.
2

(2) We need to consider only those components
1 of the position vectors which are

= (40π ×16 + × 4π ×162 )  rad
2 perpendicular to the axis. Components of

position vectors along the axis will result in
= (640π + 512π )  rad

torques perpendicular to the axis and need
= 1152π rad

not be taken into account.
1152π

Number of revolutions = =576     ⊳ Work done by a torque
2π

6.11 DYNAMICS OF ROTATIONAL MOTION
ABOUT A FIXED AXIS

Table 6.2 lists quantities associated with linear
motion and their analogues in rotational
motion. We have already compared kinematics
of the two motions. Also, we know that in
rotational motion moment of inertia and torque
play the same role as mass and force
respectively in linear motion. Given this we
should be able to guess what the other
analogues indicated in the table are. For Fig. 6.30 Work done by a force F acting on a

1 
example, we know that in linear motion, work particle of a body rotating about a fixed
done is given by F dx, in rotational motion about axis; the particle describes a circular path

a fixed axis it should be τdθ , since we already with centre C on the axis;  arc P P′ (ds )
1 1 1

gives the displacement of the particle.
know the correspondence dx → dθ  and F → τ .

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 119

Table 6.2 Comparison of Translational and Rotational Motion

Linear Motion Rotational Motion about a Fixed Axis

1 Displacement x Angular displacement θ

2 Velocity v = dx/dt Angular velocity ω = dθ/dt

3 Acceleration a = dv/dt Angular acceleration α = dω/dt

4 Mass M Moment of inertia I

5 Force F = Ma Torque τ = I α

6 Work dW = F ds Work W = τ dθ

7 Kinetic energy K = Mv2/2 Kinetic energy K = Iω2/2

8 Power P = F v Power P = τω

9 Linear momentum p = Mv Angular momentum L = Iω

Figure 6.30 shows a cross-section of a rigid If there are more than one forces acting on

body rotating about a fixed axis, which is taken the body, the work done by all of them can be
added to give the total work done on the body.

as the z-axis (perpendicular to the plane of the
Denoting the magnitudes of the torques due to

page; see Fig. 6.29). As said above we need to
the different forces as τ , τ , …  etc,

consider only those forces which lie in planes 1 2

perpendicular to the axis. Let F  be one such dW = (τ1 + τ
1 2 + ...)dθ

typical force acting as shown on a particle of Remember, the forces giving rise to the
the body at point P  with its line of action in a

1 torques act on different particles, but the
plane perpendicular to the axis. For convenience angular displacement dθ is the same for all
we call  this to be the x′–y′ plane (coincident particles. Since all the torques considered are
with the plane of the page). The particle at P

1 parallel to the fixed axis, the magnitude τ of the
describes a circular path of radius r  with centre

1 total torque is just the algebraic sum of the
C on the axis; CP  = r . magnitudes of the torques, i.e., τ = τ + τ  + .....

1 1 1 2

In time ∆t, the point moves to the position We, therefore, have
P ′. The displacement of the particle ds ,

1 1 dW = τdθ (6.39)
therefore, has magnitude ds  = r dθ and

1 1

direction tangential at P  to the circular path This expression gives the work done by the
1

as shown. Here dθ is the angular displacement total (external) torque τ which acts on the body
rotating about a fixed axis. Its similarity with

of the particle, dθ = ∠P1CP1′ .The work done by
the corresponding expression

the force on the particle is
dW= F ds

dW  = F . ds = F ds  cosφ = F (r dθ)sinα
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 for linear (translational) motion is obvious.

where φ  is the angle between F  and the tangent
1 1 Dividing both sides of Eq. (6.39) by dt gives

at P  and α  is the angle between  F and the
1, 1 1 dW dθ

radius vector OP ; φ  + α  = 90°. P = = τ = τω
1 1 1 dt dt

The torque due to F about the origin is
1 or P = τω (6.40)

OP × F . Now OP  = OC + OP . [Refer to
1 1 1 1 This is the instantaneous power. Compare

Fig. 6.17(b).] Since OC is along the axis, the torque this expression for power in the case of rotational
resulting from it is excluded from our motion about a fixed axis with that of power in
consideration. The effective torque due to F  is

1 the case of linear motion,
τ = CP × F ; it is directed along the axis of rotation

1 1 P = Fv
and has a magnitude τ = r F sinα , Therefore,

1 1 1 In a perfectly rigid body there is no internal
dW  = τ dθ motion. The work done by external torques is

1 1

2024-25



120 PHYSICS

therefore, not dissipated and goes on to increase Answer
the kinetic energy of the body. The rate at which
work is done on the body is given by Eq. (6.40).
This is to be equated to the rate at which kinetic
energy increases. The rate of increase of kinetic
energy is

d  I 2
ω  2ω dω

I
dt  2 

= ( )
2 dt

We assume that the moment of inertia does
not change with time. This means that the mass
of the body does not change, the body remains
rigid and also the axis does not change its
position with respect to the body.

Since α = dω /dt,  we get

d  I 2
ω 

  = I Fig. 6.31
ω α

dt  2 
(a) We use I α = τ

Equating rates of work done and of increase
the torque τ = F R

in kinetic energy,
τω = I ω α = 25 × 0.20 Nm (as R = 0.20m)

                        = 5.0 Nm
τ = Iα (6.41) I = Moment of inertia of flywheel about its
Eq. (6.41) is similar to Newton’s second law

for linear motion expressed symbolically as MR2

axis =
F = ma 2
Just as force produces acceleration, torque 20.0 × (0.2)2

produces angular acceleration in a body. The =  = 0.4 kg m2

2
angular acceleration is directly proportional to

α = angular acceleration
the applied torque and is inversely proportional    = 5.0 N m/0.4 kg m2 = 12.5 s–2

to the moment of inertia of the body. In this (b) Work done by the pull unwinding 2m of the
respect, Eq.(6.41) can be called Newton’s second cord
law for rotational motion about a fixed axis.

= 25 N × 2m = 50 J
u (c) Let ω be the final angular velocity. The

Example 6.12  A cord of negligible mass is 1
kinetic energy gained =  Iω2

wound round the rim of a fly wheel of mass ,
2

20 kg and radius 20 cm. A steady pull of since the wheel starts from rest. Now,
25 N is applied on the cord as shown in
Fig. 6.31. The flywheel is mounted on a ω2 = ω2

0 + 2αθ, ω0 = 0

horizontal axle with frictionless bearings. The angular displacement θ = length of
(a) Compute the angular acceleration of unwound string / radius of wheel

the wheel. = 2m/0.2 m = 10 rad
2

ω = 2 ×12.5 ×10.0 = 250(rad/s)2(b) Find the work done by the pull, when
2m of the cord is unwound.

(c) Find also the kinetic energy of the ∴
wheel at this point. Assume that the (d) The answers are the same, i.e. the kinetic energy
wheel starts from rest. gained by the wheel = work   done by the force.

(d) Compare answers to parts (b) and (c). There is no loss of energy due to friction.  ⊳

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 121

6.12 ANGULAR MOMENTUM IN CASE OF For computing the total angular momentum
ROTATION ABOUT A FIXED AXIS of the whole rigid body, we add up the

contribution of each particle of the body.
We have studied in section 6.7, the angular
momentum of a system of particles. We already Thus

know from there that the time rate of total We denote by L⊥  and L  the components of
z

angular momentum of a system of particles
L  respectively perpendicular to the z-axis and

about a point is equal to the total external torque
on the system taken about the same point. When along the z-axis;

the total external torque is zero, the total angular L⊥ = ∑ OC × m v (6.42a)
i i i

momentum of the system is conserved.
where m  and v  are respectively the mass and

We now wish to study the angular momentum i i

the velocity of the th
i  particle and C  is the centre

in the special case of rotation about a fixed axis. i

of the circle described by the particle;
The general expression for the total angular
momentum of the system of n particles is

and
N

L = ∑ r × p
i i (6.25b)

i =1 or L = Iω kˆ (6.42b)
z

We first consider the angular momentum of
The last step follows since the perpendicular

a typical particle of the rotating rigid body. We
distance of the th

i  particle from the axis is r ; and
then sum up the contributions of individual i

by definition the moment of inertia of the body
particles to get L of the whole body.

For a typical particle l = r × p. As seen in the about the axis of rotation is I = ∑ 2
m r .

i i

last section r = OP = OC + CP [Fig. 6.17(b)]. With
p = m v , Note L = L + L (6.42c)

z ⊥

l = (OC × m v) + (CP × m v) The rigid bodies which we have mainly
considered in this chapter are symmetric about

The magnitude of the linear velocity v of the the axis of rotation, i.e. the axis of rotation is
particle at P is given by v = ωr  where r  is the

⊥ ⊥ one of their symmetry axes. For such bodies, for
length of CP or the perpendicular distance of P a given OC , for every particle which has a
from the axis of rotation. Further, v is tangential i

velocity v  , there is another particle of velocity
at P to the circle which the particle describes. i

–v   located diametrically opposite on the circle
Using the right-hand rule one can check that i

with centre C  described by the particle. Together
CP × v is parallel to the fixed axis. The unit i

vector along the fixed axis (chosen as the z-axis) such pairs will contribute zero to L⊥  and as a
is k̂ . Hence result for symmetric bodies L⊥  is zero, and

CP × m v =r ( ) ˆ
⊥ mv k hence

= 2
mr⊥ ω  kˆ (since υ = ωr⊥ ) L = L = Iωkˆ (6.42d)

z

Similarly, we can check that OC × v is For bodies, which are not symmetric about
perpendicular to the fixed axis. Let us denote the axis of rotation, L is not equal to L  and hence

z

the part of  l along the fixed axis (i.e. the z-axis) L does not lie along the axis of rotation.
by l , then Referring to Table 6.1, can you tell in which

z

 2
l mr ω kˆz = CP × m v = cases L = L will not apply?

⊥ z 

Let us differentiate Eq. (6.42b). Since k̂ is a
and l = l + OC × m v

z fixed (constant) vector, we get
We note that l  is parallel to the fixed axis,

z d
but l is not. In general, for a particle, the angular (  d 

L z ) =
 (Iω) kˆ

dt dt 
momentum l is not along the axis of rotation,
i.e. for a particle, l and ω are not necessarily Now, Eq. (6.28b) states
parallel. Compare this with the corresponding

dL
fact in translation. For a particle, p and v are = τ
always parallel to each other. dt

2024-25



122 PHYSICS

As we have seen in the last section, only We have already derived this equation using
those components of the external torques which the work - kinetic energy route.
are along the axis of rotation, need to be taken
into account, when we discuss rotation about a 6.12.1 Conservation of angular momentum

fixed axis. This means we can take τ = τkˆ . We are now in a position to revisit the principle
of conservation of angular momentum in the

Since L = Lz + L⊥  and the direction of L  (vector
z context of rotation about a fixed axis. From Eq.

k̂ ) is fixed, it follows that for rotation about a (6.43c), if the external torque is zero,
fixed axis, Lz = Iω = constant (6.44)

For symmetric bodies, from Eq. (6.42d), L
z

dLz = τkˆ (6.43a) may be replaced by L .(L and L
z  are respectively

dt the magnitudes of L and L .)
z

This then is the required form, for fixed axis
dL

and ⊥ = 0 (6.43b) rotation, of Eq. (6.29a), which expresses the
dt general law of conservation of angular momentum

Thus, for rotation about a fixed axis, the of a system of particles.  Eq. (6.44) applies to many
component of angular momentum perpendicular situations that we come across in daily life.  You

may do this experiment with your friend.  Sit on a
to the fixed axis is constant. As L ˆ

z = Iωk , we swivel chair (a chair with a seat, free to rotate
get from Eq. (6.43a), about a pivot) with your arms folded and feet not
d resting on, i.e., away from, the ground.  Ask your

(Iω) = τ (6.43c) friend to rotate the chair rapidly. While the chair
dt is rotating with considerable angular speed
If the moment of inertia I does not change with stretch your arms horizontally.  What happens?
time, Your angular speed is reduced.  If you bring back
d ( your arms closer to your body, the angular speed

ω = dω
I ) I = Iα

dt dt increases again.  This is a situation where the
and we get from Eq. (6.43c), principle of conservation of angular momentum

is applicable. If friction in the rotational
τ = Iα (6.41)

Fig 6.32 (a) A demonstration of conservation of
angular momentum. A girl sits  on a Fig 6.32 (b) An acrobat employing the principle of

swivel chair and stretches her arms/ conservation of angular momentum in

brings her arms closer to the body. her performance.

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 123

mechanism is neglected, there is no external A circus acrobat and a diver take advantage
torque about the axis of rotation of the chair and of this principle.  Also, skaters and classical,
hence Iω is constant.  Stretching the arms Indian or western, dancers performing a
increases I about the axis of rotation, resulting in pirouette (a spinning about a tip–top) on the toes
decreasing the angular speed ω.  Bringing the of one foot display ‘mastery’ over this principle.
arms closer to the body has the opposite effect. Can you explain?

SUMMARY

1. Ideally, a rigid body is one for which the distances between different particles of the
body do not change, even though there are forces on them.

2. A rigid body fixed at one point or along a line can have only rotational motion. A rigid
body not fixed in some way can have either pure translational motion or a combination
of translational and rotational motions.

3. In rotation about a fixed axis, every particle of the rigid body moves in a circle which
lies in a plane perpendicular to the axis and has its centre on the axis. Every Point in
the rotating rigid body has the same angular velocity at any instant of time.

4. In pure translation, every particle of the body moves with the same velocity at any
instant of time.

5. Angular velocity is a vector. Its magnitude is ω = dθ/dt and it is directed along the axis
of rotation. For rotation about a fixed axis, this vector ω has a fixed direction.

6. The vector or cross product of two vector a and b is a vector written as a×b. The
magnitude of this vector is absinθ  and its direction is given by the right handed screw
or the right hand rule.

7. The linear velocity of a particle of a rigid body rotating about a fixed axis is given by
v = ω × r, where r is the position vector of the particle with respect to an origin along the
fixed axis. The relation applies even to more general rotation of a rigid body with one
point fixed. In that case r is the position vector of the particle with respect to the fixed
point taken as the origin.

8. The centre of mass of a system of n particles is defined as the point whose position
vector is

r
R = ∑m

i i

M

9. Velocity of the centre of mass of a system of particles is given by V = P/M, where P is the
linear momentum of the system. The centre of mass moves as if all the mass of the
system is concentrated at this point and all the external forces act at it. If the total
external force on the system is zero, then the total linear momentum of the system is
constant.

10. The angular momentum of a system of n particles about the origin is
n

L  =  ∑ ri × pi
i  =  1

The torque or moment of force on a system of n particles about the origin is

τ = ∑ r × F
i i

1

The force  F acting on the ith particle includes the external as well as internal forces.
i  

Assuming Newton’s third law of motion and that forces between any two particles act
along the line joining the particles, we can show τ  = 0 and

int

2024-25



124 PHYSICS

dL
= τext

dt
11. A rigid body is in mechanical equilibrium if

(1) it is in translational equilibrium, i.e., the total external force on it is zero : ∑Fi = 0 ,
and

(2) it is in rotational equilibrium, i.e. the total external torque on it is zero :

∑ τ i = ∑ ri × Fi = 0 .
12. The centre of gravity of an extended body is that point where the total gravitational

torque on the body is zero.

13. The moment of intertia of a rigid body about an axis is defined by the formula  I = ∑m 2
iri

where r  is the perpendicular distance of the ith point of the body from the axis. The
i

1
kinetic energy of rotation is K = Iω2

.
2

POINTS TO PONDER

1. To determine the motion of the centre of mass of a system no knowledge of internal
forces of the system is required. For this purpose we need to know only the external
forces on the body.

2. Separating the motion of a system of particles as the motion of the centre of mass, (i.e.,
the translational motion of the system) and motion about (i.e. relative to) the centre of
mass of the system is a useful technique in dynamics of a system of particles. One
example of this technique is separating the kinetic energy of a system of particles K as
the kinetic energy of the system about its centre of mass K′ and the kinetic energy of the
centre of mass MV2/2,

      K = K′ + MV2/2
3. Newton’s Second Law for finite sized bodies (or systems of particles) is based in  Newton’s

Second Law and also Newton’s Third Law for particles.
4. To establish that the time rate of change of the total angular momentum of a system of

particles is the total external torque in the system, we need not only Newton’s second
law for particles, but also Newton’s third law with the provision that the forces between
any two particles act along the line joining the particles.

5. The vanishing of the total external force and the vanishing of the total external torque
are independent conditions. We can have one without the other. In a couple, total
external force is zero, but total torque is non-zero.

6. The total torque on a  system is independent of the origin if the total external force is
zero.

7. The centre of gravity of a body coincides with its centre of mass only if the gravitational
field does not vary from one part of the body to the other.

2024-25



SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES AND ROTATIONAL MOTION 125

8. The angular momentum L and the angular velocity ω are not necessarily parallel vectors.
However, for the simpler situations discussed in this chapter when rotation is about a
fixed axis which is an axis of symmetry of the rigid body, the relation L = Iω holds good,
where I is the moment of the inertia of the body about the rotation axis.

EXERCISES

6.1 Give the location of the centre of mass of a (i) sphere, (ii) cylinder, (iii) ring, and (iv)
cube, each of uniform mass density. Does the centre of mass of a body necessarily lie
inside the body ?

6.2 In the HCl molecule, the separation between the nuclei of the two atoms is about
1.27 Å (1 Å = 10-10 m). Find the approximate location of the CM of the molecule,
given that a chlorine atom is about 35.5 times as massive as a hydrogen atom and
nearly all the mass of an atom is concentrated in its nucleus.

6.3 A child sits stationary at one end of a long trolley moving uniformly with a speed V
on a smooth horizontal floor. If the child gets up and runs about on the trolley in
any manner, what is the speed of the CM of the (trolley + child) system ?

6.4 Show that the area of the triangle contained between the vectors a and b is one half
of the magnitude of a × b.

6.5 Show that a.(b × c) is equal in magnitude to the volume of the parallelepiped formed
on the three vectors , a, b and c.

6.6 Find the components along the x, y, z axes of the angular momentum l of a particle,
whose position vector is r with components x, y, z and momentum is p with
components px, py and pz. Show that if the particle moves only in the x-y plane the
angular momentum has only a z-component.

6.7 Two particles, each of mass m and speed v, travel in opposite directions along parallel
lines separated by a distance d. Show that the angular momentum vector of the two
particle system is the same whatever be the point about which the angular momentum
is taken.

6.8 A non-uniform bar of weight W is suspended at rest by two strings of negligible
weight as shown in Fig.6.33. The angles made by the strings with the vertical are
36.9° and 53.1° respectively. The bar is 2 m long. Calculate the distance d of the
centre of gravity of the bar from its left end.

Fig. 6.33

6.9 A car weighs 1800 kg. The distance between its front and back axles is 1.8 m. Its
centre of gravity is 1.05 m behind the front axle. Determine the force exerted by the
level ground on each front wheel and each back wheel.

2024-25



126 PHYSICS

6.10 Torques of equal magnitude are applied to a hollow cylinder and a solid sphere, both
having the same mass and radius. The cylinder is free to rotate about its standard
axis of symmetry, and the sphere is free to rotate about an axis passing through its
centre. Which of the two will acquire a greater angular speed after a given time.

6.11 A solid cylinder of mass 20 kg rotates about its axis with angular speed 100 rad s-1.
The radius of the cylinder is 0.25 m. What is the kinetic energy associated with the
rotation of the cylinder? What is the magnitude of angular momentum of the cylinder
about its axis?

6.12 (a) A child stands at the centre of a turntable with his two arms outstretched. The
turntable is set rotating with an angular speed of 40 rev/min. How much is the
angular speed of the child if he folds his hands back and thereby reduces his
moment of inertia to 2/5 times the initial value ? Assume that the turntable
rotates without friction.

(b) Show that the child’s new kinetic energy of rotation is more than the initial
kinetic energy of rotation. How do you account for this increase in kinetic energy?

6.13 A rope of negligible mass is wound round a hollow cylinder of mass 3 kg and radius
40 cm. What is the angular acceleration of the cylinder if the rope is pulled with a
force of 30 N ? What is the linear acceleration of the rope ? Assume that there is no
slipping.

6.14 To maintain a rotor at a uniform angular speed of 200 rad s-1, an engine needs to
transmit a torque of 180 N m. What is the power required by the engine ?
(Note: uniform angular velocity in the absence of friction implies zero torque. In
practice, applied torque is needed to counter frictional torque). Assume that the
engine is 100% efficient.

6.15 From a uniform disk of radius R, a circular hole of radius R/2 is cut out. The centre
of the hole is at R/2 from the centre of the original disc. Locate the centre of gravity
of the resulting flat body.

6.16 A metre stick is balanced on a knife edge at its centre. When two coins, each of mass
5 g are put one on top of the other at the 12.0 cm mark, the stick is found to be
balanced at 45.0 cm. What is the mass of the metre stick?

6.17 The oxygen molecule has a mass of 5.30 × 10-26 kg and a moment of inertia of
1.94 ×10-46 kg m2 about an axis through its centre perpendicular to the lines joining
the two atoms. Suppose the mean speed of such a molecule in a gas is 500 m/s and
that its kinetic energy of rotation is two thirds of its kinetic energy of translation.
Find the average angular velocity of the molecule.

2024-25