Chapter 3 

Emerging Trends

3.1 IntroductIon “Computer science is no more 

Computers have been around for quite some time about computers than as-

now. New technologies and initiatives emerge with tronomy is about telescopes” 

each passing day. In order to understand the existing 
technologies and have a better view of the developments –Edsger Dijkstra
around us, we must keep an eye on the emerging trends. 
Many new technologies are introduced almost every day. 
Some of these do not succeed and fade away over time. 
Some of these new technologies prosper and persist over 
time, gaining attention from users. Emerging trends are 
the state-of-the-art technologies, which gain popularity 
and set a new trend among users. In this chapter, we 
will learn about some emerging trends that will make 
a huge impact (in the future) on digital economy and 
interaction in digital societies.

3.2 ArtIfIcIAl IntellIgence (AI) 
Have you ever wondered how maps in your smartphone 
are able to guide you to take the fastest route to your 
destination by analysing real time data, such as traffic 
congestion? On uploading a photo on a social networking 
site, has it ever happened that your friends in the 
photograph were recognised and tagged automatically? 
These are some of the examples of application of In this chapter
Artificial Intelligence. The intelligent digital personal » Introduction
assistants like Siri, Google Now, Cortana, Alexa are » Artificial Intelligence 
all powered by AI. Artificial Intelligence endeavours to (AI) 
simulate the natural intelligence of human beings into » Big Data 
machines, thus making them behave intelligently. An » Internet of Things 
intelligent machine is supposed to imitate some of the (IoT)
cognitive functions of humans like learning, decision- » Cloud Computing 
making and problem solving. In order to make machines » Grid Computing
perform tasks with minimum human intervention, they 
are programmed to create a knowledge base and make » Blockchains 

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   45 08-Apr-19   11:41:14 AM



46 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

decisions based on it. AI system can also learn from 
past experiences or outcomes to make new decisions.

A knowledge base is 3.2.1 Machine Learning
a store of information 
consisting of facts, Machine Learning is a subsystem of Artificial 
assumptions and rules Intelligence, wherein computers have the ability to learn 
which an AI system from data using statistical techniques, without being 
can use for decision explicitly programmed by a human being. It comprises 
making. algorithms that use data to learn on their own and 

make predictions. These algorithms called models, are 
first trained and tested using a training data and testing 
data, respectively. After successive trainings, once these 
models are able to give results to an acceptable level of 
accuracy, they are used to make predictions about new 
and unknown data.
3.2.2 Natural Language Processing (NLP) 

Activity 3.1 The predictive typing feature of search engine that 
helps us by suggesting the next word in the sentence 

Find out how NLP is 
helping differently- while typing keywords and the spell checking features 
abled persons? are examples of Natural Language Processing (NLP). 

It deals with the interaction between human and 
computers using human spoken languages, such as 
Hindi, English, etc.

In fact it is possible to search the web or operate or 
control our devices using our voice. All this has been 
possible by NLP. An NLP system can perform text-to-
speech and speech-to-text conversion as depicted in 
Figure 3.1. 

Machine translation is a rapidly emerging field 
where machines are already 
able to translate texts from one 
language to another with fair 
amount of correctness. Another 
emerging application area is 
automated customer  service 
where a computer software can 
interact with customers to serve 

Figure 3.1: Use of natural language processing their queries or complaints.
3.2.3 Immersive Experiences 
With the three-dimensional (3D) videography, the 
joy of watching movies in theatres has reached to 
a new level. Video games are also being developed to 

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   46 08-Apr-19   11:41:14 AM



EmErging TrEnds 47

provide immersive experiences to the player. Immersive 
experiences allow us to visualise, feel and react by 
stimulating our senses. It enhances our interaction 
and involvement, making them more realistic and 
engaging. Immersive experiences have been used 
in the field of training, such as driving simulators 
(Figure 3.2), flight simulator and so on. Immersive 
experience can be achieved using virtual reality and Figure 3.2: Driving simulator
augmented reality.
(A) Virtual Reality 
Everything that we experience in our reality is perceived 
through our senses. From this came the idea that 
if we can present our senses with made-up or non-
real information, our perception of reality would also 
alter in response to that. Virtual Reality (VR) is a 
three-dimensional, computer-generated situation that 
simulates the real world. The user can interact with and 
explore that environment by getting immersed in it while 
interacting with the objects and other actions of the user. 
At present, it is achieved with the help of VR Headsets. 
In order to make the experience of VR more realistic, it Figure 3.3: Virtual Reality 

Headset
promotes other sensory information like sound, smell, 
motion, temperature, etc. It is a comparatively new field 
and has found its applications in gaming (Figure 3.3), 
military training, medical procedures, entertainment, 
social science and psychology, engineering and 
other areas where simulation is needed for a better 
understanding and learning.
(B) Augmented Reality 
The superimposition of computer generated perceptual 
information over the existing physical surroundings is 
called as Augmented Reality (AR). It adds components 
of the digital world to the physical world, along with 
the associated tactile and other sensory requirements, Figure 3.4: Location-based 
thereby making the environment interactive and digitally Augmented Reality
manipulable. Users can access information about the 
nearest places with reference to their current location. 
They can get information about places and choose on 

Unlike Virtual Reality, the 
the basis of user reviews. With help of location-based Augmented Reality does not 
AR App, travellers can access real-time information of create something new, it 
historical places just by pointing their camera viewfinder just alters or augments the 

perception of the underlying 
to subjects as depicted in Figure 3.4. Location-based physical world through 
AR apps are major forms of AR apps. additional information. 

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   47 08-Apr-19   11:41:16 AM



48 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

3.2.4 Robotics 
A robot is basically a machine capable of carrying out one 

Robotics is an or more tasks automatically with accuracy and precision. 
interdisciplinary branch Unlike other machines, a robot is programmable by a 
of technology requiring computer, which means it can follow the instructions 
applications of mechanical 
engineering, electronics, given through computer programs. Robots were initially 
and computer science, conceptualised for doing repetitive industrial tasks 
among others. Robotics is 
primarily concerned with that are boring or stressful for humans or were labour-
the design, fabrication, intensive. Sensors are one of the prime components of 
operation, and application a robot. Robot can be of many types, such as wheeled 
of robots. robots, legged robots, manipulators and humanoids. 

Robots that resemble humans are known as humanoids. 
Robots are being used in industries, medical science, 
bionics, scientific research, military, etc. Some examples 
are: 
• NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover (MER) mission is 

a robotic space mission to study about the planet 
Mars (Figure 3.5).

Figure 3.5: NASA’s Mars Figure 3.6: Sophia is a Figure 3.7: Drone
Exploration Rover (MER) humanoid

• Sophia is a humanoid that uses artificial intelligence, 
visual data processing, facial recognition and also 
imitates human gestures and facial expressions, as 

Think and Reflect shown in Figure 3.6.
Can a drone be helpful • A drone is an unmanned aircraft which can be 
in the event of a natural remotely controlled or can fly autonomously through 
calamity? software-controlled flight plans in their embedded 

systems, working in conjunction with onboard 
sensors and GPS (Figure 3.7). They are being used 
in many fields, such as journalism, filming and 
aerial photography, shipping or delivery at short 
distances, disaster management, search and rescue 

Activity 3.2 operations, healthcare, geographic mapping and 
Find out what role are structural safety inspections, agriculture, wildlife 
robots playing in the monitoring or pooching, besides law-enforcement and 
medical field? border patrolling.

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   48 08-Apr-19   11:41:17 AM



EmErging TrEnds 49

3.3 BIg dAtA 
With technology making an inroad into almost every 
sphere of our lives, data is being produced at a colossal 
rate. Today, there are over a billion Internet users, and 
a majority of the world’s 
web traffic is coming from 
smartphones. Figure 
3.8 shows that at the 
current pace, around 2.5 
quintillion bytes of data 
are created each day, and 
the pace is increasing with 
the continuous evolution 
of the Internet of Things 
(IoT).

This results in the 
generation of data sets 
of enormous volume and 
complexity called Big 
Data. Such data cannot 
be processed and analysed 
using traditional data 
processing tools as the data 
is not only voluminous, but 
also unstructured like our Figure 3.8: Sources of big data (numbers are 

approximate)
posts, instant messages 
and chats, photographs that we share through various 
sites, our tweets, blog articles, news items, opinion 
polls and their comments, audio/video chats, etc. 
Big Data not only represents voluminous data, it also 
involves various challenges like integration, storage, 
analysis, searching, processing, transfer, querying and 
visualisation of such data. Big data sometimes hold rich 
information and knowledge which is of high business 
value, and therefore there is a keen effort in developing 
software and methods to process and analyse big data. Think and Reflect

How are your digital 
3.3.1 Characteristics of Big Data activities contributing to 
Big data exhibits following five characteristics shown in generation of Big data?

Figure 3.9, that distinguish it from traditional data.

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   49 08-Apr-19   11:41:17 AM



50 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

(A) Volume
Volume The most prominent characteristic of big data is its 

enormous size. If a particular dataset is of such large 
Value

BIG Velocity size that it is difficult to process it with traditional DBMS 
DATA tools, it can be termed as big data.

(B) Velocity
Veracity Variety It represents the rate at which the data under 

consideration are being generated and stored. Big data 
Figure 3.9: Characteristics has an exponentially higher rate of generation than 

of big data traditional data sets. 
(C) Variety
It asserts that a dataset has varied data, such as 
structured, semi-structured and unstructured data. 
Some examples are text, images, videos, web-pages and 
so on. 
(D) Veracity
Big data can be sometimes inconsistent, biased, noisy 
or there can be abnormality in the data or issues 
with the data collection methods. Veracity refers to 
the trustworthiness of the data because processing 
such incorrect data can give wrong results or mislead 
the interpretations.
(E) Value
Big data is not only just a big pile of data, but also 
possess to have hidden patterns and useful knowledge 
which can be of high business value. But as there is cost 
of investment of resources in processing big data, we 
should make a preliminary enquiry to see the potential 
of the big data in terms of value discovery or else our 
efforts could be in vain.
3.3.2 Data Analytics 
“Data analytics is the process of examining data sets 
in order to draw conclusions about the information 
they contain, with the aid of specialised systems 
and software.”

Data analytics technologies and techniques are 
becoming popular day-by-day. They are used in 
commercial industries to enable organisations to make 
more informed business decisions. In the field of science 
and technology, it can be useful for researchers to verify 
or disprove scientific models, theories and hypotheses. 
Pandas is a library of the programming language 

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   50 08-Apr-19   11:41:17 AM



EmErging TrEnds 51

Python that can be used as a tool to make data analysis 
much simpler.

3.4 Internet of thIngs (Iot)
The term computer network that we commonly use is 
the network of computers. Such a network consists 
of a laptop, desktop, server, or a portable device like 
tablet, smartphone, smart watch, 
etc., connected through wire or 
wireless. We can communicate 
between these devices using 
Internet or LAN. Now imagine what 
if our bulbs, fans and refrigerator 
also became a part of this network. 
How will they communicate with 
each other, and what will they 
communicate? Think about the 
advantages and tasks that can 
be accomplished if all these 
devices with smart connectivity 
features are able to communicate Figure 3.10: Internet of Things (IoT)
amongst themselves and we are 
also able to communicate with them using computers 
or smartphones.

The ‘Internet of Things’ is a network of devices 
that have an embedded hardware and software to 
communicate (connect and exchange data) with other 
devices on the same network as shown in Figure 3.10. 
At present, in a typical household, many devices have Activity 3.3
advanced hardware (microcontrollers) and software. Explore and list a few 
These devices are used in isolation from each other, with IoT devices available in 

the market. 
maximum human intervention needed for operational 
directions and input data. IoT tends to bring together 
these devices to work in collaboration and assist each 
other in creating an intelligent network of things. For 
example, if a microwave oven, an air conditioner, door 
lock, CCTV camera or other such devices are enabled 
to connect to the Internet, we can access and remotely 
control them on-the-go using our smartphone.
3.4.1 Web of Things (WoT) 
Internet of Things allows us to interact with different 
devices through Internet with the help of smartphones 

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   51 08-Apr-19   11:41:18 AM



52 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

Activity 3.4 or computers, thus creating a personal network. But to 
interact with ‘n’ number of different devices, we need 

We use GPS to 
navigate outdoors. VPS to install ‘n’ different apps. Wouldn’t it be convenient 
is another emerging to have one interface to connect all the devices? The 
trend that uses web is already being used as a system to communicate 
Augmented Reality. with each other. So, will it be possible to use the web 
Explore and find its 
other utilities. in such a way that all things can communicate with 

each other in the most efficient manner by integrating 
them together? Web of Things (WoT) allows use of web 
services to connect anything in the physical world, 
besides human identities on web. It will pave way for 
creating smart homes, smart offices, smart cities and 
so on.
3.4.2 Sensors 
What happens when you hold your mobile vertically 
or horizontally? The display also changes to vertical or 
horizontal with respect to the way we hold our mobile. 
This is possible with the help of two sensors, namely 
accelerometer and gyroscope (gyro). The accelerometer 
sensor in the mobile phones detects the orientation of 
the phone. The Gyroscope sensors, tracks rotation or 
twist of your hand and add to the information supplied 
by the accelerometer.

Sensors are very commonly used as monitoring 
and observing elements in real world applications. The 
evolution of smart electronic sensors is contributing in 
a large way to the evolution of IoT. It will lead to creation 
of new sensor-based, intelligent systems.

A smart sensor is a device that takes input from 
the physical environment and uses built-in computing 
resources to perform predefined functions upon detection 
of specific input and then process data before passing it on.
3.4.3 Smart Cities 
With rapid urbanisation, the load on our cities are 
increasing day-by-day, and there are challenges in 
management of resources like land water, waste, air 
pollution, health and sanitation, traffic congestions, 
public safety and security, besides the overall city 
infrastructures including road, rail, bridge, electricity, 

Think and Reflect subways, disaster management, sports facilities, etc. 
What are your ideas of These challenges are forcing many city planners around 
transforming your city the world to look for smarter ways to manage them and 
into a smart city? make cities sustainable and livable.

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   52 08-Apr-19   11:41:18 AM



EmErging TrEnds 53

The idea of a 
smart city as shown 
in Figure 3.11 makes 
use of computer 
and communication 
technology along with 
IoT to manage and 
distribute resources 
efficiently. The smart 
building shown here 
uses sensors to detect 
earthquake tremors 
and then warn 
nearby buildings 
so that they can 
prepare themselves 
accordingly. The smart Figure 3.11: Smart city
bridge uses wireless sensors to detect any loose bolt, 
cable or crack. It alerts concerned authorities through 
SMS. The smart tunnel also uses wireless sensors to 
detect any leakage or congestion in the tunnel. This 
information can be sent as wireless signals across the 
network of sensor nodes to a centralised computer for 
further analysis.

Every sphere of life in a city like transportation 
systems, power plants, water supply networks, waste 
management, law enforcement, information systems, 
schools, libraries, hospitals and other community 
services work in unison to optimise the efficiency of city 
operations and services. 

3.5 cloud computIng

Cloud computing is an emerging trend in the field 
of information technology, where computer-based 
services are delivered over the Internet or the cloud, 
and it is accessible to the user from anywhere using 
any device. The services comprise software, hardware 
(servers), databases, storage, etc. These resources are 
provided by companies called cloud service providers 
and usually charge on a pay per use basis, like the 
way we pay for electricity usage. We already use cloud 
services while storing our pictures and files as backup 
on Internet, or host a website on the Internet. Through 

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   53 08-Apr-19   11:41:18 AM



54 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

cloud computing, a user can run a bigger application 
or process a large amount of data without having the 
required storage or processing power on their personal 
computer as long as they are connected to the Internet. 
Besides other numerous features, cloud computing 
offers cost-effective, on-demand resources. A user can 
avail need-based resources from the cloud at a very 
reasonable cost. 
3.5.1 Cloud Services 
A better way to understand the cloud is to interpret 
everything as a service. A “service” corresponds to any 
facility provided by the cloud. There are three standard 

models to categorise different 
computing services delivered 
through cloud as shown in Figure 
3.12. These are Infrastructure 
as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a 
Service (PaaS), and Software as a 
Service (SaaS). 
(A)   Infrastructure as a Service 
(IaaS)
The IaaS providers can offer 
different kinds of computing 
infrastructure, such as servers, 
virtual machines (VM), storage 
and backup facility, network 

Figure 3.12: Cloud computing components, operating systems 
or any other hardware or software. Using IaaS from 
the cloud, a user can use the hardware infrastructure 
located at a remote location to configure, deploy 
and execute any software application on that cloud 
infrastructure. They can outsource the hardware and 
software on a demand basis and pay as per the usage, 
thereby they can save the cost of software, hardware 
and other infrastructures as well as the cost of setting 
up, maintenance and security.
(B) Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
The facility provided by the cloud, where a user can 
install and execute an application without worrying 
about the underlying infrastructure and their setup. 
That is, PaaS provides a platform or environment 
to develop, test, and deliver software applications. 

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   54 08-Apr-19   11:41:18 AM



EmErging TrEnds 55

Suppose we have developed a web application using Activity 3.5
MySQL and Python. To run this application online, we 
can avail a pre-configured Apache server from cloud Name a few data 

centers in India along 
having MySQL and Python pre-installed. Thus, we are with the major services 
not required to install MySQL and Python on the cloud, that they provide. 
nor do we need to configure the web server (Apache, 
nginx). In PaaS, the user has complete control over the 
deployed application and its configuration. It provides 
a deployment environment for developers at a much 
reduced cost lessening the complexity of buying and 
managing the underlying hardware and software.
(C) Software as a Service (SaaS)
SaaS provides on-demand access to application software, 
usually requiring a licensing or subscription by the 
user. While using Google Doc, Microsoft Office 365, 
Drop Box, etc., to edit a document online, we use SaaS 
from cloud. A user is not concerned about installation 
or configuration of the software application as long 
as the required software is accessible. Like PaaS, a 
user is provided access to the required configuration 
settings of the application software, that they are using 
at present.

In all of the above standard service models, a user 
can use on-demand infrastructure or platform or 
software and is usually charged as per usage, thereby 
eliminating the need of a huge investment upfront for 
a new or evolving organisation. In order to utilise and 
harness the benefits of cloud computing, Government of 
India has embarked upon an ambitious initiative — “GI 
Cloud” which has been named as ‘MeghRaj’ (https://
cloud.gov.in). 

Users sharing their resources

3.6 grId computIng
A grid is a computer network of geographically 
dispersed and heterogeneous computational 
resources as shown in Figure 3.13. Unlike Grid Resource
cloud, whose primary focus is to provide Management 
services, a grid is more application specific System

and creates a sense of a virtual supercomputer 
with an enormous processing power and 
storage. The constituent resources are called 
nodes. These different nodes temporarily come 
together to solve a single large task and to reach Users sharing their resources

a common goal. Figure 3.13: Grid computing

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   55 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM



56 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

Think and Reflect Nowadays, countless computational nodes ranging 
from hand-held mobile devices to personal computers 

How can some of and workstations are connected to LAN or Internet. 
the emerging trends 
discussed in this Therefore, it is economically feasible to reuse or utilise 
chapter be used as their resources like memory as well as processing power. 
assistive tools for people The grid provides an opportunity to solve computationally 
with disabilities? intense scientific and research problems without 

actually procuring a costly hardware.
Grid can be of two types — (i) Data grid, used to 

manage large and distributed data having required 
multi-user access, and (ii) CPU or Processor grid, where 
processing is moved from one PC to another as needed 
or a large task is divided into subtasks and divided to 
various nodes for parallel processing.

Grid computing is different from IaaS cloud service. 
In case of IaaS cloud service, there is a service provider 
who rents the required infrastructure to the users. 
Whereas in grid computing, multiple computing nodes 
join together to solve a common computational problem.

To set up a grid, by connecting numerous nodes in 
terms of data as well as CPU, a middleware is required to 
implement the distributed processor architecture. The 
Globus toolkit (http://toolkit.globus.org/toolkit) is one 
such software toolkit used for building grids, and it is 
open source. It includes software for security, resource 
management, data management, communication, fault 
detection, etc.

3.7 BlockchAIns

Traditionally, we perform digital transactions by storing 
data in a centralised database and the transactions 
performed are updated one by one on the database. That 
is how the ticket booking websites or banks operate. 
However, since all the data are stored on a central 
location, there are chances of data being hacked or lost.

The blockchain technology works on the concept of 
decentralised and shared database where each computer 
has a copy of the database. A block can be thought as 
a secured chunk of data or valid transaction. Each 
block has some data called its header, which is visible 
to every other node, while only the owner has access to 
the private data of the block. Such blocks form a chain 

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   56 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM



EmErging TrEnds 57

The request is 
Someone requests broadcast to all 

a transaction nodes in the 
network

If verified by all nodes, 
The transaction the block get added in the 

is complete already existing chain of 
blocks

Figure 3.14: Block chain technology

called blockchain as shown in Figure 3.14. We can 
define blockchain as a system that allows a group of 
connected computers to maintain a single updated and 
secure ledger. Each computer or node that participates 
in the blockchain receives a full copy of the database. It 
maintains an ‘append only’ open ledger which is updated 
only after all the nodes within the network authenticate 
the transaction. Safety and security of the transactions 
are ensured because all the members in the network 
keep a copy of the blockchain and so it is not possible 
for a single member of the network to make changes or 
alter data.

The most popular application of blockchains 
technology is in digital currency. However, due to its 
decentralised nature with openness and security, 
blockchains are being seen as one of the ways to ensure 
transparency, accountability and efficiency in business 
and as well as governance systems.

For example, in healthcare, better data sharing 
between healthcare providers would result in a higher 
probability of accurate diagnosis, more effective 
treatments, and the overall increased ability of healthcare 
organisations to deliver cost-effective care. Another 
potential application can be for  land registration records, 
to avoid various disputes arising out of land ownership Think and Reflect
claims and encroachments. A blockchain-based voting 

Name any two areas 
system can solve the problem of vote alterations and other than those given 
other issues. Since everything gets stored in the ledger, where the concept of 
voting can become more transparent and authentic. The blockchain technology 
blockchain technology can be used in diverse sectors, can be useful.

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   57 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM



58 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

notes such as banking, media, telecom, travel and hospitality 
and other areas.

summAry

• Artificial Intelligence (AI) endeavours to simulate 
the natural intelligence of human beings into 
machines thus making them intelligent.

• Machine learning comprises algorithms that use 
data to learn on their own and make predictions.

• Natural Language Processing (NLP) facilitates 
communicating with intelligent systems using a 
natural language.

• Virtual Reality (VR) allows a user to look at, explore 
and interact with the virtual surroundings, just 
like one can do in the real world.

• The superimposition of computer-generated 
perceptual information over the existing physical 
surroundings is called Augmented Reality.

• Robotics can be defined as the science or study of 
the technology primarily associated with the design, 
fabrication, theory and application of robots.

• Big data holds rich information and knowledge 
which can be of high business value. Five 
characteristics of big data are: Volume, Velocity, 
Variety, Veracity and Value.

• Data analytics is the process of examining data sets 
in order to draw conclusions about the information 
they contain.

• The Internet of Things (IoT) is a network of devices 
that have an embedded hardware and software to 
communicate (connect and exchange data) with 
other devices on the same network.

• A sensor is a device that takes input from the 
physical environment and uses built-in computing 
resources to perform predefined functions upon 
detection of specific input and then processes data 
before passing it on.

• Cloud computing allows resources located at 
remote locations to be made available to anyone 
anywhere. Cloud services can be Infrastructure as 
a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and 
Software as a Service (SaaS).

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   58 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM



EmErging TrEnds 59

• A grid is a computer network of geographically notes
dispersed and heterogeneous computational 
resources.

• Blockchain is a system that allows a group of 
connected computers to maintain a single updated 
and secure ledger which is updated only after all the 
nodes in the network authenticate the transaction.

exercIse

1. List some of the cloud-based services that you are 
using at present.

2. What do you understand by the Internet of Things? 
List some of its potential applications.

3. Write short notes on the following:
a) Cloud Computing 
b) Big data and its Characteristics

4. Explain the following along with their applications.
a) Artificial Intelligence
b) Machine Learning

5. Differentiate between cloud computing and grid 
computing with suitable examples.

6. Justify the following statement:
“Storage of data is cost-effective and time saving in 

cloud computing.” 
7. What is on-demand service? How it is provided in 

cloud computing?
8. Write examples of the following:

a) Government provided cloud computing platform
b) Large scale private cloud service providers and 

the services they provide
9. A company interested in cloud computing is looking 

for a provider who offers a set of basic services, 
such as virtual server provisioning and on demand 
storage that can be combined into a platform for 
deploying and running customised applications. 
What type of cloud computing model fits these 
requirements?
a) Platform as a Service
b) Software as a Service
c) Application as a Service
d) Infrastructure as a Service

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   59 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM



60 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

notes 10. If the government plans to make a smart school by 
applying IoT concepts, how can each of the following 
be implemented in order to transform a school into 
IoT-enabled smart school?
a) e-textbooks
b) Smart boards
c) Online Tests
d) Wifi sensors on classrooms doors
e) Sensors in buses to monitor their location
f) Wearables (watches or smart belts) for 

attendance monitoring.
11. Five friends plan to try a startup. However, they 

have a limited budget and limited computer 
infrastructure. How can they avail the benefits of 
cloud services to launch their startup?

12. Governments provide various scholarships to 
students of different classes. Prepare a report on how 
blockchain technology can be used to promote 
accountability, transparency and efficiency in 
distribution of scholarships?

13. How are IoT and WoT related?
14. Match the columns:
Column A Column B

1. You got a reminder to take A. Smart Parking
medication

2. You got an SMS alert that B. Smart 
you forgot to lock the door Wearable

3. You got an SMS alert that C. Home 
parking space is available Automation
near your block

4. You turned off your LED TV D. Smart Health
from your wrist watch

2024-25

Ch 3.indd   60 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM