Chapter 1 
Computer System

1.1 IntroductIon to computer SyStem “A computer would deserve 
A computer is an electronic device that can be to be called intelligent if it 
programmed to accept data (input), process it and could deceive a human into 
generate result (output). A computer along with believing that it was human.” 
additional hardware and software together is called a –Alan Turing
computer system.  

A computer system primarily comprises a central 
processing unit (CPU), memory, input/output devices 
and storage devices. All these components function 
together as a single unit to deliver the desired output. 
A computer system comes in various forms and sizes. 
It can vary from a high-end server to personal desktop, 
laptop, tablet computer, or a smartphone. 

Figure 1.1 shows the block diagram of a computer 
system. The directed lines represent the flow of data 
and signal between the components. 

Secondary 
Storage Devices

Primary 
Memory In this chapter

Input Control Unit Output » Introduction to 
Device (CU) Device Computer System

» Evolution of 
Arithmetic Logic Computer 

Unit (ALU)
» Computer Memory 

Central Processing 
Unit (CPU) » Data Transfer 

Figure 1.1: Components of a computer system between Memory 
and CPU

1.1.1 Central Processing Unit (CPU) » Data and 
It is the electronic circuitry of a computer that carries Information
out the actual processing and usually referred as the » Microprocessors
brain of the computer. It is commonly called processor » Software
also. Physically, a CPU can be placed on one or more 
microchips called integrated circuits (IC). The ICs » Operating System
comprise semiconductor materials. 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   1 08-Apr-19   11:36:15 AM



2 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

The CPU is given instructions and data through 
programs. The CPU then fetches the program and data 
from the memory and performs arithmetic and logic 

Keyboard operations as per the given instructions and stores the 
result back to memory.

While processing, the CPU stores the data as well 
as instructions in its local memory called registers. 

Mouse Registers are part of the CPU chip and they are limited 
in size and number. Different registers are used for 
storing data, instructions or intermediate results. 

Other than the registers, the CPU has two main 
Scanner components — Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU) and Control 

Unit (CU). ALU performs all the arithmetic and logic 
operations that need to be done as per the instruction in a 
program. CU controls sequential instruction execution, 

Touch Screen interprets instructions and guides data flow through the 
computer’s memory, ALU and input or output devices. 

Figure 1.2: Input devices CPU is also popularly known as microprocessor. We will 
study more about it in section 1.5. 
1.1.2 Input Devices
The devices through which control signals are sent 
to a computer are termed as input devices. These 
devices convert the input data into a digital form that is 
acceptable by the computer system. Some examples of 
input devices include keyboard, mouse, scanner, touch 
screen, etc., as shown in Figure 1.2. Specially designed 
braille keyboards are also available to help the visually 
impaired for entering data into a computer. Besides, we 

Display monitor can now enter data through voice, for example, we can 
use Google voice search to search the web where we can 
input the search string through our voice.

Data entered through input device is temporarily 
Speaker stored in the main memory (also called RAM) of the 

computer system. For permanent storage and future use, 
the data as well as instructions are stored permanently 
in additional storage locations called secondary memory.

Printer 1.1.3 Output Devices
The device that receives data from a computer system 
for display, physical production, etc., is called output 

3D printer device. It converts digital information into human-
understandable form. For example, monitor, projector, 

Figure 1.3: Output devices headphone, speaker, printer, etc. Some output devices 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   2 08-Apr-19   11:36:15 AM



Computer SyStem 3

are shown in Figure 1.3. A braille display monitor is 
useful for a visually challenged person to understand 
the textual output generated by computers.

A printer is the most commonly used device to get 
output in physical (hardcopy) form. Three types of 
commonly used printers are inkjet, laserjet and dot 
matrix. Now-a-days, there is a new type of printer 
called 3D-printer, which is used to build physical A punched card is a 
replica of a digital 3D design. These printers are being piece of stiff paper that 
used in manufacturing industries to create prototypes stores digital data in 

the form of holes at 
of products. Their usage is also being explored in the predefined positions.
medical field, particularly for developing body organs.

1.2 evolutIon of computer
From the simple calculator to a modern day powerful 
data processor, computing devices have evolved in a 
relatively short span of time. The evolution of computing 
devices in shown through a timeline in Figure 1.4

Pascaline EDVAC/ENIAC
John Von Neumann introduced 

Blaize Pascal invented a mechanical the concept of stored program 
calculator known as Pascal calculator computer which was capable of 

or Pascaline to do addition and storing data as well as program 
subtraction of two numbers directly in the memory. The EDVAC and 

and multiplication and division through then the ENIAC computers were 
repeated addition and subtraction. developed based on this concept.

Tabulating Machine Integrated Circuit
Herman Hollerith designed An Integrated Circuit (IC) is 

1642 a tabulating machine for 1945 a silicon chip which contains 
summarising the data stored entire electronic circuit on a 

on the punched card. It is very small area. The size of 
computer drastically reduced 

step towards programming. because of ICs.

1890 1970

1834 1947

Analytic Engine Transistor
Charles Babbage invented Vacuum tubes were 

analytical engine, a replaced by transistors 
500 BC mechanical computing device 1937 developed at Bell Labs, 

for inputting, processing, using semiconductor 
storing and displaying the materials.

output, which is considered 
to form the basis of modern 

Abacus computers.
Turing Machine

Computing is attributed to The Turing machine concept was a 
the invention of ABACUS general purpose programmable 
almost 3000 years ago. It machine that was capable of solving 
was a mechanical device any problem by executing the 
capable of doing simple program stored on the punched cards.

arithmetic calculations only.
Figure 1.4:  Timeline showing key inventions in computing technology

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   3 08-Apr-19   11:36:15 AM



4 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

The Von Neumann architecture is shown in Figure 
1.5. It consists of a Central Processing Unit (CPU) 
for processing arithmetic and logical instructions, a 
memory to store data and programs, input and output 

devices and communication 
channels to send or receive the 
output data. Electronic Numerical 
Integrator and Computer (ENIAC) 
is the first binary programmable 

Figure 1.5: Von Neumann architecture for computer based on Von Neumann 
 the computer architecture. 

During the 1970s, Large Scale Integration (LSI) of 
electronic circuits allowed integration of complete 
CPU on a single chip, called microprocessor. Moore’s 
Law predicted exponential growth in the number 

In 1965, Intel co- of transistors that could be assembled in a single 
founder Gordon Moore microchip. In 1980s, the processing power of computers 

introduced Moore’s increased exponentially by integrating around 3 million 
Law which predicted components on a small-sized chip termed as Very 
that the number of 

transistors on a chip Large Scale Integration (VLSI). Further advancement in 
would double every two technology has made it feasible to fabricate high density 

years while the costs of transistors and other components (approx 106 
would be halved. components) on a single IC called Super Large Scale 

Integration (SLSI) as shown in Figure 1.6. 
IBM introduced its first personal computer (PC) for 

the home user in 1981 and Apple introduced Macintosh 

10,000,000,000
1,000,000,000 Core 2 DUO Core i7

100,000,000 Intel Microprocessors
Pentium II Pentium I V

10,000,000 Pentium III
Pentium 

1,000,000 486
486

100,000 Invention of the 386
10,000 Transistor 286

8086
1,000 4004

100 Doubles every 2 years
10

1
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020

Figure 1.6: Exponential increase in number of  transistors used in ICs over time

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   4 08-Apr-19   11:36:15 AM

Number of Transistors
per Integrated Circuit



Computer SyStem 5

machines in 1984. The popularity of the PC surged 
by the introduction of Graphical User Interface (GUI) 
based operating systems by Microsoft and others in 
place of computers with only command line interface, 
like UNIX or DOS. Around 1990s, the growth of World 
Wide Web (WWW) further accelerated mass usage of 
computers and thereafter computers have become an 
indispensable part of everyday life.

Further, with the introduction of laptops, personal 
computing was made portable to a great extent. This 
was followed by smartphones, tablets and other 
personal digital assistants. These devices have leveraged 
the technological advancements in processor 
miniaturisation, faster memory, high speed data and 
connectivity mechanisms. 

The next wave of computing devices includes 
the wearable gadgets, such as smart watch, lenses, 
headbands, headphones, etc. Further, smart appliances 
are becoming a part of the Internet of Things (IoT), by 
leveraging the power of Artificial Intelligence (AI).

1.3 computer memory

A computer system needs memory to store the data and 
instructions for processing. Whenever we talk about the 
‘memory’ of a computer system, we usually talk about the 
main or primary memory. The secondary memory (also 
called storage device) is used to store data, instructions 
and results permanently for future use.
1.3.1 Units of Memory
A computer system uses binary numbers to store and 
process data. The binary digits 0 and 1, which are the 
basic units of memory, are called bits. Further, these 
bits are grouped together to form words. A 4-bit word 
is called a Nibble. Examples of nibble are 1001, 1010, 
0010, etc. A two nibble word, i.e., 8-bit word is called a 
byte, for example, 01000110, 01111100, 10000001, etc.

Like any other standard unit, bytes are grouped 
together to make bigger chunks or units of memory. 
Table 1.1 shows different measurement units for digital 
data stored in storage devices.

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   5 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



6 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

Table 1.1 Measurement units for digital data
Unit Description Unit Description

KB (Kilobyte) 1 KB = 1024 Bytes PB (Petabyte) 1 PB = 1024 TB
MB (Megabyte) 1 MB = 1024 KB EB (Exabyte) 1 EB = 1024 PB
GB (Gigabyte) 1 GB = 1024 MB ZB (Zettabyte) 1 ZB = 1024 EB
TB (Terabyte) 1 TB = 1024 GB YB (Yottabyte) 1 YB = 1024 ZB

1.3.2 Types of Memory
Human beings memorise many things over a lifetime, and 
recall from memory to make a decision or some action.
However, we do not rely on our memory completely, and 
we make notes and store important data and information 
using other media, such as notebook, manual, journal, 
document, etc. Similarly, computers have two types of 
memory   — primary and secondary. 
(A) Primary Memory
Primary memory is an essential component of a 
computer system. Program and data are loaded into the 
primary memory before processing. The CPU interacts 
directly with the primary memory to perform read or 
write operation. It is of two types viz. (i) Random Access 
Memory (RAM) and (ii) Read Only Memory (ROM).

RAM is volatile, i.e., as long as the power is supplied 
to the computer, it retains the data in it. But as soon 
as the power supply is turned off, all the contents of 
RAM are wiped out. It is used to store data temporarily 
while the computer is working. Whenever the computer 
is started or a software application is launched, the 
required program and data are loaded into RAM 
for processing. RAM is usually referred to as main 
memory and it is faster than the secondary memory or 
storage devices.

On the other hand, ROM is non-volatile, which 
means its contents are not lost even when the power is 
turned off. It is used as a small but faster permanent 
storage for the contents which are rarely changed. For 

Think and Reflect example, the startup program (boot loader) that loads 
the operating system into primary memory, is stored 

Suppose there is a 
computer with RAM in ROM.
but no secondary (B) Cache Memory
storage. Can we install RAM is faster than secondary storage, but not as fast 
a software on that 
computer? as a computer processor. So, because of RAM, a CPU 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   6 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



Computer SyStem 7

may have to slow down. To speed up the operations of 
the CPU, a very high speed memory is placed between 
the CPU and the primary memory known as cache. It 
stores the copies of the data from frequently accessed 
primary memory locations, thus, reducing the average 
time required to access data from primary memory. 
When the CPU needs some data, it first examines the 
cache. In case the requirement is met, it is read from 
the cache, otherwise the primary memory is accessed.
(C) Secondary Memory
Primary memory has limited storage capacity and Pen 
is either volatile (RAM) or read-only (ROM). Thus, a Drive

computer system needs auxiliary or secondary memory 
to permanently store the data or instructions for 
future use. The secondary memory is non-volatile and 
has larger storage capacity than primary memory. It 
is slower and cheaper than the main memory. But, it CD/DVD
cannot be accessed directly by the CPU. Contents of 
secondary storage need to be first brought into the main 
memory for the CPU to access. Examples of secondary 
memory devices include Hard Disk Drive (HDD), CD/
DVD, Memory Card, etc., as shown in Figure 1.7.

However, these days, there are secondary storage 
devices like SSD which support very fast data transfer 
speed as compared to earlier HDDs. Also, data transfer 
between computers have become easier and simple due 
to the availability of small-sized and portable flash or 
pen drives. 

1.4 data tranSfer between memory and cpu
Figure 1.7: Storage devices 

Data need to be transferred between the CPU and 
primary memory as well as between the primary and 
secondary memory. 

Data are transferred between different components of 
a computer system using physical wires called bus. For 
example, bus is used for data transfer between a USB 
port and hard disk or between a hard disk and main 
memory. Bus is of three types — (i) Data bus to transfer 
data between different components, (ii) Address bus to 
transfer addresses between CPU and main memory. 
The address of the memory location that the CPU wants 
to read or write from is specified in the address bus, 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   7 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



8 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

and (iii) Control bus to communicate 
control signals between different 
components of a computer. All these 
three buses collectively make the 
system bus, as shown in Figure 1.8.

As the CPU interacts directly with 
main memory, any data entered from 
input device or the data to be accessed 
from hard disk needs to be placed in the 
main memory for further processing. 

 Figure 1.8: Data transfer between components through The data is then transferred between 
system bus CPU and main memory using bus.

The CPU places on the address bus, the address of 
the main memory location from which it wants to read 
data or to write data. While executing the instructions, 
the CPU specifies the read or write control signal through 
the control bus. 

As the CPU may require to read data from main 
memory or write data to main memory, a data bus is 
bidirectional. But the control bus and address bus are 
unidirectional. To write data into memory, the CPU 
places the data on the data bus, which is then written 
to the specific address provided through the address 
bus. In case of read operation, the CPU specifies the 
address, and the data is placed on the data bus by a 
dedicated hardware, called memory controller. The 
memory controller manages the flow of data into and 
out of the computer's main memory.

1.5 mIcroproceSSorS

In earlier days, a computer's CPU used to occupy a large 
room or  multiple cabinets. However, with advancement 
in technology, the physical size of CPU has reduced and 
it is now possible to place a CPU on a single microchip 
only. A processor (CPU) which is implemented on a 
single microchip is called microprocessor. Nowadays, 
almost all the CPUs are microprocessors. Hence, the 
terms are used synonymously for practical purpose.

Microprocessor  is a small-sized electronic component 
inside a computer that carries out various tasks involved 
in data processing as well as arithmetic and logical 
operations. These days, a microprocessor is built over 
an integrated circuit comprising millions of small 
components like resistors, transistors and diodes.

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   8 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



Computer SyStem 9

Microprocessors have evolved over time in terms 
of their increased processing capability, decreasing 
physical size and reduced cost. Currently available 
microprocessors are capable of processing millions of 
instructions per millisecond. Table 1.2 lists different 
types of microprocessors along with their generation, 
time period, and underlying technology since their 
inception in early 1970s.

Table 1.2 Generations of Microprocessor
Generation Era Chip Word Maximum Clock Cores Example*

type size memory size speed
First 1971-73 LSI 4 / 8 1 KB 108 KHz- Single Intel 8080

bit 200 KHz
Second 1974-78 LSI 8 bit 1 MB Upto 2 MHz Single Motorola 6800 

Intel 8085
Third 1979-80 VLSI 16 bit 16 MB 4 MHz - 6 Single Intel 8086

MHz
Fourth 1981-95 VLSI 32 bit 4 GB Upto 133 Single Intel 80386

MHz Motorola 68030
Fifth 1995 till SLSI 64 bit 64 GB 533 MHz - Multicore Pentium, 

date 34 GHz Celeron, Xeon
*few prominent examples are included. 

1.5.1 Microprocessor Specifications
Microprocessors are classified on the basis of different 
features which include chip type, word size, memory 
size, clock speed, etc. These features are briefly 
explained below:
(A) Word Size
Word size is the maximum number of bits that a 
microprocessor can process at a time. Earlier, a word 
was of 8 bits, as it was the maximum limit at that 
time. At present, the minimum word size is 16 bits and 
maximum word size is 64 bits.
(B) Memory Size
Depending upon the word size, the size of RAM varies. 
Initially, RAM was very small (4MB) due to 4/8 bits word Activity 1.1
size. As word size increased to 64 bits, it has become The maximum memory 
feasible to use RAM of size upto 16 Exabytes (EB). size of microprocessors 

of different generations 
(C) Clock Speed are given at Table 1.2. 
Computers have an internal clock that generates pulses Represent each of the 
(signals) at regular intervals of time. Clock speed simply memory size in terms 

of power of 2.
means the number of pulses generated per second by the 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   9 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



10 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

Activity 1.2 clock inside a computer. The clock speed indicates the 
speed at which the computer can execute instructions.

Find out the clock speed 
of the microprocessor Earlier, it was measured in Hertz (Hz) and Kilohertz 
of your computer and (kHz). But with advancement in technology and chip 
compare with that of density, it is now measured in Gigahertz (GHz), i.e., 
your peers? billions of pulses per second.

(D) Cores
Core is a basic computation unit of the CPU. Earlier 
processors had only one computation unit, thereby 
capable of performing only  one task at a time. With the 
advent of multicore processor, it has become possible 
for the computer to execute multiple tasks, thereby 
increasing the system’s performance. CPU with two, 
four, and eight cores is called dual-core, quad-core and 
octa-core processor, respectively. 
1.5.2 Microcontrollers
The microcontroller is a small computing device which 
has a CPU, a fixed amount of RAM, ROM and other 
peripherals all embedded on a single chip as compared 
to microprocessor that has only a CPU on the chip. The 
structure of a microcontroller is shown in Figure 1.9. 
Keyboard, mouse, washing machine, digital camera, 
pendrive, remote controller, microwave are few examples 
of microcontrollers. As these are designed for specific 
tasks only, hence their size as well as cost is reduced. 

Because of the very small size of the 
microcontroller, it is embedded in another device 
or system to perform a specific functionality. For 

Clock CPU example, the microcontroller in a fully automatic 
Memory

washing machine is used to control the washing cycle 
Bus System without any human intervention. The cycle starts 

with the filling of water, after which the clothes are 
Input Output soaked and washed; thereafter the water is drained 

I/O-ports
and the clothes are spin dry. The simple use of 
microcontroller has permitted repetitive execution 

Figure 1.9: Structure of of tedious tasks automatically without any human 
microcontroller intervention, thereby saving precious time.

1.6 data and InformatIon
A computer is primarily for processing data. A computer 
system considers everything as data, be it instructions, 
pictures, songs, videos, documents, etc. Data can also be 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   10 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



Computer SyStem 11

raw and unorganised facts that are processed to get 
meaningful information.

So understanding the concept of data along with 
its different types is crucial to understand the overall 
functioning of a computer. Sometimes people use the 
terms data, information and knowledge interchangeably, 
which is incorrect. 
1.6.1 Data and Its Types
A computer system has many input devices, which 
provide it with raw data in the form of facts, concepts, 
instructions, etc., Internally everything is stored in 
binary form (0 and 1), but externally, data can be input 
to a computer in the text form consisting of English 
alphabets A–Z, a–z, numerals 0 – 9, and special symbols 
like @, #, etc. Data can be input in other languages too 
or it can be read from the files. The input data may 
be from different sources, hence it may be in different 
formats. For example, an image is a collection of Red, 
Green, Blue (RGB) pixels, a video is made up of frames, 
and a fee receipt is made of numeric and non-numeric 
characters. Primarily, there are three types of data.
(A) Structured Data
Data which follows a strict record structure and is easy 
to comprehend is called structured data. Such data with 
pre-specified tabular format may be stored in a data file 
to access in the future. Table 1.3 shows structured data 
related to monthly attendance of students maintained 
by the school.

Table 1.3 Structured data: Monthly attendance records of students
Roll No Name Month Attendance (in %)

R1 Mohan May 95
R2 Sohan May 75
R3 Sheen May 92
R4 Geet May 82
R5 Anita May 97
R1 Mohan July 98
R2 Sohan July 65
R3 Sheen July 85
R4 Geet July 94
R5 Anita July 85

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   11 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



12 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

Think and Reflect It is clear that such data is organised in row/column 
format and is easily understandable. Structured data 

Can you give some may be sorted in ascending or descending order. In the 
more examples of 
unstructured data? example, attendance data is sorted in increasing order 

on the column ‘month’. Other examples of structured 
data include sales transactions, online railway ticket 
bookings, ATM transactions, etc. 
(B) Unstructured Data
Data which are not organised in a pre-defined record 
format is called unstructured data. Examples include 
audio and video files, graphics, text documents, social 
media posts, satellite images, etc. Figure 1.10 shows a 
report card with monthly attendance record details sent 
to parents. Such data are unstructured as they consist 
of textual contents as well as graphics, which do not 
follow a specific format.

Attendance record for the month of July
School Logo

Attended:

Guardian’s Signature Principal’s Signature

Figure 1.10: Unstructured data: Monthly attendance record 

(C) Semi-structured Data
Data which have no well-defined structure but 
maintains internal tags or markings to separate data 
elements are called semi-structured data. Examples 
include email document, HTML page, comma separated 
values (csv file), etc. Figure 1.11 shows an example of 
semi-structured data containing student’s month-wise 
attendance details. In this example, there is no specific 

format for each attendance 
Name: Mohan  Month: July  Class: XI Attendance: 98 
Name: Sohan  Month: July  Class: XI Attendance: 65 record. Here, each data value 
Name: Sheen  Month: July  Class: XI Attendance: 85 is preceded by a tag (Name, 
Name: Geet  Month: May  Class: XI Attendance: 82
Name: Geet  Month: July  Class: XI Attendance: 94 Month, Class, Attendance) for 

Figure 1.11: Semi-structured data: Month-wise total the interpretation of the data 
attendance record maintained by the school value while processing.

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   12 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer SyStem 13

1.6.2 Data Capturing, Storage and Retrieval Activity 1.3
To process data, we need to first input or capture 
the data. This is followed by its storage in a file or a Visit some of the places 

like bank, automobile 
database so that it can be used in the future. Whenever showroom, shopping 
data is to be processed, it is first retrieved from the mall, tehsil office, etc., 
file or database so that we can perform further actions and find out 2 – 3 names 
on it. of tools or instruments 

used to capture data in 
(A) Data Capturing digital format.
It involves the process of gathering data from different 
sources in the digital form. This capturing may vary 
from simple instruments like keyboard, barcode readers 
used at shopping outlets (Figure 1.12), comments or 
posts over social media, remote sensors on an earth 
orbiting satellite, etc. Sometimes, heterogeneity among 
data sources makes data capturing a complex task. Figure 1.12: Capturing 
(B) Data Storage data using barcode reader
It is the process of storing the captured data for 
processing later. Now-a-days data is being produced at 
a very high rate, and therefore data storage has become 
a challenging task. However, the decrease in the cost 
of digital storage devices has helped in simplifying 
this task. There are numerous digital storage devices 
available in the market like as shown in Figure 1.7.

Data keeps on increasing with time. Hence, the 
storage devices also require to be upgraded periodically. 
In large organisations, computers with larger and 
faster storage called data servers are deployed to store 
vast amount of data. Such dedicated computers help 
in processing data efficiently. However, the cost (both 
hardware and software) of setting up a data server as 
well as its maintenance is high, especially for small 
organisations and startups.
(C) Data Retrieval 
It involves fetching data from the storage devices, for its 
processing as per the user requirement. As databases 
grow, the challenges involved in search and retrieval of 
the data in acceptable time, also increase. Minimising 
data access time is crucial for faster data processing.
1.6.3 Data Deletion and Recovery
One of the biggest threats associated with digital data is 
its deletion. The storage devices can malfunction or crash 
down resulting in the deletion of data stored. Users can 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   13 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



14 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

Activity 1.4 accidentally erase data from storage devices, or a hacker 
or malware can delete the digital data intentionally.

Explore possible ways 
of recovering deleted Deleting digitally stored data means changing the 
data or data from a details of data at bit level, which can be very time-
corrupted device. consuming. Therefore, when any data is simply deleted, 

its address entry is marked as free, and that much 
space is shown as empty to the user, without actually 
deleting the data. 

In case data gets deleted accidentally or corrupted, 
there arises a need to recover the data. Recovery of the 
data is possible only if the contents or memory space 
marked as deleted have not been overwritten by some 
other data. Data recovery is a process of retrieving 
deleted, corrupted and lost data from secondary 
storage devices.

There are usually two security concerns associated 
with data. One is its deletion by some unauthorised 
person or software. These concerns can be avoided 
by limiting access to the computer system and using 
passwords for user accounts and files, wherever 
possible. There is also an option of encrypting files to 
protect them from unwanted modification.

The other concern is related to unwanted recovery of 
Activity 1.5 data by unauthorised user or software. Many a times, 

Create a test file and we discard our old, broken or malfunctioning storage 
then delete it using 
Shift+Delete from devices without taking care to delete data. We assume 
the keyboard. Now that the contents of deleted files are permanently 
recover the file using removed. However, if these storage devices fall into the 
the methods you have hands of mischief-mongers, they can easily recover 
explored in Activity 1.4.

data from such devices; this poses a threat to data 
confidentiality. This concern can be mitigated by using 
proper tools to delete or shred data before disposing off 
any old or faulty storage device.

1.7 Software 
Till now, we have studied about the physical 
components or the hardware of the computer system. 
But the hardware is of no use on its own. Hardware 
needs to be operated by a set of instructions. These 
sets of instructions are referred to as software. It is that 
component of a computer system, which we cannot 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   14 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer SyStem 15

touch or view physically. It comprises the instructions 
and data to be processed using the computer hardware. 
The computer software and hardware complete any 
task together.

The software comprises a set of instructions which 
on execution deliver the desired outcome. In other 
words, each software is written for some computational 
purpose. Some examples of software include operating 
systems like Ubuntu or Windows 7/10, word processing 
tool like LibreOffice or Microsoft Word, video player like 
VLC Player, photo editors like GIMP and LibreOffice 
draw. A document or image stored on the hard disk or 
pen drive is referred to as a soft-copy. Once printed, the Hardware refers to the 

document or an image is called a hard-copy. physical components 
of the computer system 

1.7.1 Need of Software which can be seen and 
touched. For example, 

The sole purpose of a software is to make the computer RAM, keyboard, 
hardware useful and operational. A software knows how printer, monitor, CPU, 

to make different hardware components of a computer etc. On the other hand, 
software is a set of 

work and communicate with each other as well as with instructions and data 
the end-user. We cannot instruct the hardware of a that makes hardware 
computer directly. Software acts as an interface between functional to complete 

human users and the hardware. the desired task. 

Depending on the mode of interaction with hardware 
and functions to be performed, the software can be broadly 
classified into three categories viz. (i) System software, 
(ii) Programming tools and (iii) Application software.
1.7.2 System Software
The software that provides the basic functionality 
to operate a computer by interacting directly with its 
constituent hardware is termed as system software. A 
system software knows how to operate and use different 
hardware components of a computer. It provides services 
directly to the end user, or to some other software. 
Examples of system software include operating systems, 
system utilities, device drivers, etc.
(A) Operating System
As the name implies, the operating system is a system 
software that operates the computer. An operating 
system is the most basic system software, without 
which other software cannot work. The operating system 
manages other application programs and provides 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   15 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



16 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

access and security to the users of the system. Some 
of the popular operating systems are Windows, Linux, 
Macintosh, Ubuntu, Fedora, Android, iOS, etc. 
(B) System Utilities
Software used for maintenance and configuration of the 
computer system is called system utility. Some system 
utilities are shipped with the operating system for 
example disk defragmentation tool, formatting utility, 
system restore utility, etc. Another set of utilities are 
those which are not shipped with the operating system 
but are required to improve the performance of the 
system, for example, anti-virus software, disk cleaner 
tool, disk compression software, etc.
(C) Device Drivers

Activity 1.6 As the name signifies, the purpose of a device driver is to 
ensure proper functioning of a particular device. When 

Ask your teacher to 
help you locate any two it comes to the overall working of a computer system, 
device drivers installed the operating system does the work. But everyday new 
on your computer. devices and components are being added to a computer 

system. It is not possible for the operating system alone 
to operate all of the existing and new devices, where each 
device has diverse characteristics. The responsibility 
for overall control, operation and management of a 
particular device at the hardware level is delegated to 
its device driver.

The device driver acts as an interface between the 
device and the operating system. It provides required 

services by hiding the details 
of operations performed at the 
hardware level of the device. Just 
like a language translator, a device 
driver acts as a mediator between 
the operating system and the 
attached device. The categorisation 
of software is shown in Figure 1.13.
1.7.3 Programming Tools
In order to get some work done 
by the computer, we need to give 
instructions which are applied on the 
input data to get the desired outcome.
Computer languages are developed 

Figure 1.13: Categorisation of software for writing these instructions. 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   16 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer SyStem 17

It is important to understand here that computers and noteS
humans understand completely different languages. 
While humans are able to write programs in high-level 
language, computers understand machine language. 
There is a continuous need for conversion from high 
level to machine level language, for which translators 
are needed. Also, to write the instruction, code editors 
(e.g., IDLE in Python) are needed. We will briefly describe noteS
here the programming languages, language translators 
and program development tools.
(A) Classification of Programming Languages
It is very difficult for a human being to write 
instructions in the form of 1s and 0s. So different types 
of computer programming languages are developed to 
simplify the coding. Two major categories of computer 
programming languages are low-level languages and 
high-level languages.

Low-level languages are  machine  dependent languages 
and include machine language and assembly language. 
Machine language uses 1s and 0s to write instructions 
which are directly understood and executed by the 
computer. But writing a code in machine language is 
difficult as one has to remember all operation codes 
and machine addresses. Also finding errors in the code 
written in machine language is difficult. 

To simplify the writing of code, assembly language 
was developed that allowed usage of English-like words 
and symbols instead of 1s and 0s. But one major 
drawback of writing a code in this language is that the 
code is computer specific, i.e., the code written for one 
type of CPU cannot be used for another type of CPU.

High level languages are machine independent and 
are simpler to write code into. Instructions are using 
English like sentences and each high level language 
follows a set of rules, similar to natural languages. 
However, these languages are not directly understood 
by the computer. Hence, translators are needed to 
translate high-level language codes into machine 
language. Examples of high level language include C++, 
Java, Python, etc.
(B) Language Translators
As the computer can understand only machine 
language, a translator is needed to convert program 
written in assembly or high level language to machine 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   17 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



18 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

Code in high language. The program code written in assembly or 
level language high-level language is called source code. The source 
(Source Code)

code is converted by a translator into the machine 
understandable form called object (machine) code as 
depicted in Figure 1.14. 

Language 
translater As we have different types of computer languages, 

different translators are needed to convert the source 
code to machine code. The three types of translators 
used in computing systems are assembler, compiler 

Code in machine 
language and interpreter.

(Object Code) The translator used to convert the code written 
Figure 1.14: Translator to in assembly language to machine language is called 
convert source code into assembler. Each assembler can understand a specific 

object code microprocessor instruction set only and hence, the 
machine code is not portable.

We also need translators to convert codes written 
in high level language (source code) to machine 
understandable form (machine code) for execution by 
the computer. Compiler converts the source code into 
machine code. If the code follows all syntactic rules of 
the language, then it is executed by the computer. Once 
translated, the compiler is not needed. 

An interpreter translates one line at a time instead of 
the whole program at one go. Interpreter takes one line, 
converts it into executable code if the line is syntactically 
correct, and then it repeats these steps for all lines in 
the source code. Hence, interpreter is always needed 
whenever a source code is to be executed.
(C) Program Development Tools
Whenever we decide to write a program, we need a text 
editor. An editor is a software that allows us to create a 
text file where we type instructions and store the file as 
the source code. Then an appropriate translator is used 
to get the object code for execution. In order to simplify 
the program development, there are software called 
Integrated Development Environment (IDE) consisting 
of text editor, building tools and debugger. A program 
can be typed, compiled and debugged from the IDE 
directly. Besides Python IDLE, Netbeans, Eclipse, Atom, 
Lazarus are few other examples of IDEs. Debugger, as 
the name implies, is the software to detect and correct 
errors in the source code.

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   18 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer SyStem 19

1.7.4 Application Software
Activity 1.7

The system software provides the core functionality of With the help of your 
the computer system. However, different users need the teacher, install one 
computer system for different purposes depending upon application software in 
their requirements. Hence, a new category of software your computer.
is needed to cater to different requirements of the end-
users. This specific software that works on top of the 
system software is termed as application software. There 
are again two broad categories of application software — 
general purpose and customised application software.

A computer system 
(A)  General Purpose Software can work without 
The application software developed for generic application software, 
applications, to cater to a bigger audience in general but it cannot work 
are called general purpose software. Such ready-made without system 
application software can be used by end users as per software. For example, 
their requirements. For example, spreadsheet tool Calc we can use a computer 

even if no word 
of LibreOffice can be used by any computer user to do processing software 
calculation or to create account sheet. Adobe Photoshop, is installed, but if no 
GIMP, Mozilla web browser, iTunes, etc., fall in the operating system is 
category of general purpose software. installed, we cannot 

work on the computer. 
(B) Customised Software In other words, the use 
These are custom or tailor-made application software, of computer is possible 
that are developed to meet the requirements of a specific in the absence of 
organisation or an individual. They are better suited to application software.

the needs of an individual or an organisation, considering 
that they are designed as per special requirements. Some 
examples of user-defined software include websites, 
school management software, accounting software, 
etc. It is similar to buying a piece of cloth and getting a 
tailor-made garment with the fitting, colour, and fabric 
of our choice.
1.7.5 Proprietary or Free and Open Source Software 
The developers of some application software provide Activity 1.8
their source code as well as the software freely to the 
public, with an aim to develop and improve further with With the help of your 

teacher, install one 
each other’s help. Such software is known as Free and free and open source  
Open Source Software (FOSS). For example, the source application software on 
code of operating system Ubuntu is freely accessible your computer.
for anyone with the required knowledge to improve or 
add new functionality. More examples of FOSS include 
Python, Libreoffice, Openoffice, Mozilla Firefox, etc. 
Sometimes, software are freely available for use but 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   19 21-May-19   4:32:01 PM



20 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

Think and Reflect source code may not be available. Such software are 
called freeware. Examples of freeware are Skype, Adobe 

When a computer is 
turned on, who brings Reader, etc. When the software to be used has to be 
the OS into RAM from purchased from the vendor who has the copyright of the 
the secondary storage? software, then it is a proprietary software. Examples of 

proprietary software include Microsoft Windows, Tally, 
Quickheal, etc. A software can be freeware or open 
source or proprietary software depending upon the 
terms and conditions of the person or group who has 
developed and released that software.

1.8 operatIng SyStem

An operating system (OS) can be considered to be a 
resource manager which manages all the resources of a 
computer, i.e., its hardware including CPU, RAM, Disk, 
Network and other input-output devices. It also controls 

Types of User various application software and device drivers, manages 
Interface of 

Operating System system security and handles access by different users. 
It is the most important system software. Examples of 
popular OS are Windows, Linux, Android, Macintosh 
and so on.

Command-based 
Interface The primary objectives of an operating system are 

two-fold. The first is to provide services for building and 
running application programs. When an application 
program needs to be run, it is the operating system 

Graphical User which loads that program into memory and allocates 
Interface it to the CPU for execution. When multiple application 

programs need to be run, the operating system decides 
the order of the execution. 

Touch-based The second objective of an operating system is to 
Interface provide an interface to the user through which the user 

can interact with the computer. A user interface is a 
software component which is a part of the operating 
system and whose job is to take commands or inputs 

Voice-based from a user for the operating system to process.
Interface

1.8.1 OS User Interface
There are different types of user interfaces each of which 
provides a different functionality. Some commonly used 

Gesture-based 
Interface interfaces are shown in Figure 1.15.

(A) Command-based Interface
Figure 1.15: Types of user  Command-based interface requires a user to enter the 

interface of OS commands to perform different tasks like creating, 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   20 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer SyStem 21

opening, editing or deleting a file, etc. The user has to noteS
remember the names of all such programs or specific 
commands which the operating system supports.

The primary input device used by the user for 
command based interface is the keyboard. Command 
based interface is often less interactive and usually 
allows a user to run a single program at a time.

Examples of operating systems with command-based 
interface include MS-DOS and Unix.
(B) Graphical User Interface
Graphical User Interface (GUI) lets users run programs 
or give instructions to the computer in the form of 
icons, menus and other visual options. Icons usually 
represent files and programs stored on the computer 
and windows represent running programs that the user 
has launched through the operating system. 

The input devices used to interact with the GUI 
commonly include the mouse and the keyboard. 
Examples of operating systems with GUI interfaces 
include Microsoft Windows, Ubuntu, Fedora and 
Macintosh, among others.
(C) Touch-based Interface
Today smartphones, tablets and PCs allow users to 
interact with the system simply using the touch input. 
Using the touchscreen, a user provides inputs to the 
operating system, which are interpreted by the OS as 
commands like opening an app, closing an app, dialing 
a number, scrolling across apps, etc. 

Examples of popular operating systems with touch-
based interfaces are Android and iOS. Windows 
8.1 and 10 also support touch-based interfaces on 
touchscreen devices. 
(D) Voice-based Interface
Modern computers have been designed to address the 
needs of all types of users including people with special 
needs and people who want to interact with computers 
or smartphones while doing some other task. For users 
who cannot use the input devices like the mouse, 
keyboard, and touchscreens, modern operating systems 
provide other means of human-computer interaction. 
Users today can use voice-based commands to make 
a computer work in the desired way. Some operating 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   21 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



22 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

systems which provide voice-based control to users 
include iOS (Siri), Android (Google Now or “OK Google”), 
Microsoft Windows 10 (Cortana) and so on.
(E) Gesture-based Interface
Some smartphones based on Android and iOS as well 
as laptops let users interact with the devices using 
gestures like waving, tilting, eye motion and shaking. 
This technology is evolving faster and it has promising 
potential for application in gaming, medicine and 
other areas.
1.8.2 Functions of Operating System
Now let us explore the important services and tasks 
that an operating system provides for managing the 
computer system.
(A) Process Management
While a computer system is operational, different tasks 
are running simultaneously. A program is intended to 
carry out various tasks. A task in execution is known 

Operating system is called 
resource manager as it as process. We can activate a system monitor program 

manages different resources that provides information about the processes being 
like main memory, CPU, 
I/O devices, so that each executed on a computer. In some systems it can be 
resource is used optimally activated using Ctrl+Alt+Delete. It is the responsibility 

and system performance does of operating system to manage these processes and get 
not deteriorate.

multiple tasks completed in minimum time. As CPU is 
the main resource of computer system, its allocation 
among processes is the most important service of the 
operating system. Hence process management concerns 
the management of multiple processes, allocation 
of required resources, and exchange of information 
among processes.
(B) Memory Management
Primary or main memory of a computer system is 
usually limited. The main task of memory management 
is to give (allocate) and take (free) memory from running 
processes. Since there are multiple processes running 
at a time, there arises a need to dynamically (on-the-go) 
allocate and free memory to the processes. Operating 
system should do it without affecting other processes 
that are already residing in the memory and once the 
process is finished, it is again the responsibility of the 
operating system to take the memory space back for re-

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   22 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer SyStem 23

utilisation. Hence, memory management concerns with noteS
management of main memory so that maximum memory 
is occupied or utilised by large number of processes 
while keeping track of each and every location within 
the memory as free or occupied. 

(C) File Management 
Data and programs are stored as files in the secondary 
storage of a computer system. File management involves 
the creation, updation, deletion and protection of these 
files in the secondary memory. Protection is a crucial 
function of an operating system, as multiple users can 
access and use a computer system. There must be a 
mechanism in place that will stop users from accessing 
files that belong to some other user and have not been 
shared with them. File management system manages 
secondary memory, while memory management system 
handles the main memory of a computer system. 

(D) Device Management 
A computer system has many I/O devices and hardware 
connected to it. Operating system manages these 
heterogeneous devices that are interdependent. The 
operating system interacts with the device driver and the 
related software for a particular device. The operating 
system must also provide the options for configuring 
a particular device, so that it may be used by an end 
user or some other device. Just like files, devices also 
need security measures and their access to different 
devices must be restricted by the operating system to 
the authorised users, software and other hardware only.

Summary

• A computing device, also referred as computer, 
processes the input data as per given instructions 
to generate desired output. 

• Computer system has four physical components 
viz. (i) CPU, (ii) Primary Memory, (iii) Input Device 
and (iv) Output Devices. They are referred to as 
hardware of computer.

• Computer system has two types of primary 
memories viz. (i) RAM, the volatile memory and 
(ii) ROM, the non-volatile memory.

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   23 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



24 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

noteS • System bus is used to transfer data, addresses 
and control signals between components of the 
computer system.

• A microprocessor is a small-sized electronic 
component inside a computer that performs basic 
arithmetic and logical operations on data. 

• Microcontroller is a small computing device which 
has a CPU, a fixed amount of RAM, ROM and other 
peripherals embedded on a single chip.

• Software is a set of instructions written to achieve 
the desired tasks and are mainly categorised 
as system software, programming tools and 
application software. 

• Hardware of a computer cannot function on its own. 
It needs software to be operational or functional.

• Operating system is an interface between the user 
and the computer and supervises the working of 
computer system, i.e., it monitors and controls the 
hardware and software of the computer system.

exercISe

1. Name the software required to make a computer 
functional. Write down its two primary services.

2. How does the computer understand a program 
written in high level language?

3. Why is the execution time of the machine code less 
than that of source code?

4. What is the need of RAM? How does it differ from 
ROM?

5. What is the need for secondary memory?
6. How do different components of the computer 

communicate with each other?
7. Draw the block diagram of a computer system. Briefly 

write about the functionality of each component.
8. What is the primary role of system bus? Why is 

data bus is bidirectional while address bus is 
unidirectional?

9. Differentiate between proprietary software and 
freeware software. Name two software for each type.

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   24 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer SyStem 25

10. Write the main difference between microcontroller noteS
and microprocessor. Why do smart home appliances 
have a microcontroller instead of microprocessor 
embedded in them?

11. Mention the different types of data that you deal 
with while browsing the Internet.

12. Categorise the following data as structured, semi-
structured and unstructured:
• Newspaper
• Cricket Match Score
• HTML Page
• Patient records in a hospital

13. Name the input or output device used to do the 
following:
a) To output audio 
b) To enter textual data
c) To make hard copy of a text file
d) To display the data or information 
e) To enter audio-based command
f) To build 3D models 
g) To assist a visually-impaired individual in 

entering data
14. Identify the category (system, application, 

programming tool) of the following software: 
a) Compiler
b) Assembler
c) Ubuntu
d) Text editor

explore yourSelf

1. Ask your teacher to help you locate any two device 
drivers installed on your computer.

2. Write any two system software and two application 
software installed on your computer.

3. Which microprocessor does your personal computer 
have? Which generation does it belong to?

4. What is the clock speed of your microprocessor?
5. Name any two devices in your school or home that 

have a microcontroller. 

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   25 08-Apr-19   11:36:18 AM



26 Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi

noteS 6. Check the size of RAM and HDD of a computer in 
your school. Make a table and write their size in 
Bytes, Kilobytes, Megabytes and Gigabytes.

7. List all secondary storage devices available at your 
school or home.

8. Which operating system is installed on your 
computer at home or school?

2024-25

Ch 1.indd   26 08-Apr-19   11:36:18 AM