PRINCIPLES OF 
MANAGEMENT 2

CHAPTER
Guiding Principles of Toyota Motor Corporation
Toyota follows certain well-defined business principles guiding L E A R N I N G 
its functioning. These are: O B J E C T I V E S
1. Honour the language and spirit of law of every nation and After studying this 

undertake open and fair corporate activities to be a good 
corporate citizen around the world. chapter, you should 

2. Respect the culture and customs of every nation and be able to:
contribute to economic and social development through 
corporate activities in local communities. n State the 

3. To provide clean and safe products and to enhance the meaning, nature 
quality of life everywhere. and significance 

4. Create and develop advanced technologies and provide 
outstanding products and services that fulfil the needs of of principles of 
customers worldwide. management;

5. Foster a corporate culture that enhances individual creativity 
and teamwork value, while honouring mutual trust and n	Explain Taylor’s 
respect between management and labour. principles and 

6. Pursue growth and harmony with global community through techniques 
innovative management. of Scientific 

7. Work with business partners in research and creativity to 
achieve stable, long-term growth and mutual benefits and be Management; and
open to new partnerships. These principles, will guide the 

n Explain Fayol’s 
company in its global vision 2010. This global vision envisages 
continuous innovations in future, use of environment friendly principles of 
technologies, respecting and working with different sections of management.
society and establishing an interactive relationship with society.

http://www.toyotaglobal.com/company/history of toyota/ 
75years/data/conditions/philosophy/guiding principles.html/

It is clear from the foregoing case that stating the vision as well as the ways 
managerial pursuits at Toyota Motor to achieve it. Similarly, many other 
Corporation are driven by principles business enterprises have followed 
that serve as broad guidelines for various principles in their working 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   30 24-09-2019   12:05:00 PM



Principles of Management 31

over a period of time. A number of fascinating. In this chapter we will 
management thinkers, and writers study the contributions of Fredrick 
have also studied principles of Winslow Taylor and Henri Fayol who 
management from time-to-time. as you have read are associated with 
In fact, there is a long history of the classical management theory. 
management thought. Management Both of them contributed immensely 
principles have evolved and are in towards the study of management as 
the continuous process of evolution. a discipline. Whereas F.W. Taylor was 
(see box.) an American mechanical engineer, 

You can see that the evolution of Henri Fayol was a French mining 
management thought has been very engineer. Taylor gave the concept 

Evolution of Management Principles
In tracing the history of management, one comes across various schools of thought 
that have outlined principles to guide management practices. These schools of 
thought may be divided into 6 distinctive phases: 1. Early Perspectives; 2. Classical 
Management Theory; 3. Neo Classical Theory — Human Relations Approach;  
4. Behavioural Science Approach — Organisational Humanism; 5. Management 
Science/Operational Research; 6. Modern Management.
EARLY PERSPECTIVES
 The first known management ideas were recorded in 3000-4000 B.C. One 

Pyramid built by Egyptian ruler Cheops required work to be done by 100,000 
men for over twenty years in 2900 B.C. It covered 13 acres of land and measured 
481 meters in height. The stone slabs had to be moved thousands of kilometres 
of distance. As folklore goes, even the sound of a hammer was not heard in the 
villages in the vicinity of the site of these pyramids. Such monumental work could 
not be completed without adherence to principles of sound management.

CLASSICAL MANAGEMENT THEORY
 Rational economic view, scientific management, administrative principles, and 

bureaucratic organisation characterise this phase. While the rational economic 
view assumed that people are motivated by economic gains primarily; scientific 
management of F.W. Taylor and others emphasised one best way of production 
etc; administrative theorists personified by Henri Fayol etc looked at the best 
way to combine jobs and people into an efficient organisation; bureaucratic 
organisation theorists led by Max Weber looked at ways to eliminate managerial 
inconsistencies due to abuse of power which contributed to ineffectiveness. 
This was the era of the industrial revolution and factory system of production. 
Large scale production would not have been possible without adherence to 
the principles governing organising production based on division of labour and 
specialisation, relationship between man and the machine, managing people 
and so on.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   31 24-09-2019   12:05:00 PM



32 Business Studies

NEO CLASSICAL THEORY — HUMAN RELATIONS APPROACH
 This school of thought developed between 1920s to 1950s felt that employees 

simply do not respond rationally to rules, chains of authority and economic 
incentives alone but are also guided by social needs, drives and attitudes. 
Hawthorne Studies at GEC etc., were conducted then. It was quite natural that 
in the early phases of the industrial revolution, the emphasis was on development 
of techniques and technology. The attention to the human factor was the salient 
aspect of this school of thought. This attention was to serve as a precursor to the 
development of behavioural sciences. 

BEHAVIOURAL SCIENCE APPROACH — ORGANISATIONAL HUMANISM 
 Organisational behaviourists like Chris Argyris; Douglas McGregor, Abraham 

Maslow and Fredrick Herzberg used the knowledge of psychology, sociology 
and anthropology to develop this approach. The underlying philosophy of 
organisational humanism is that individuals need to use all of their capacities and 
creative skills at work as well as at home. 

MANAGEMENT SCIENCE/OPERATIONAL RESEARCH
 It emphasises research on operations and use of quantitative techniques to aid 

managers to take decisions.
MODERN MANAGEMENT 
 It sees modern organisations as complex systems and underlies contingency 

approach and use of modern techniques to solve organisational and human 
problems.

Source: Adapted from Internet modern history source book on www.fordham.edu

of ‘Scientific Management’ whereas seniority, whereas the other may 
Fayol emphasised ‘Administrative follow the principle of merit.
Principles’. One may distinguish principles 

But before we go into the details of management from those of pure 
of their contributions let us study science. Management principles are 
the meaning of the principles of not as rigid as principles of pure 
management. science. They deal with human 
PrinciPles of ManageMent: behaviour and, thus, are to be 

applied creatively given the demands 
the concePt of the situation. Human behaviour is 
A managerial principle is a broad never static and so also technology, 
and general guideline for decision- which affects business. Hence all 
making and behaviour. For example the principles have to keep pace 
while deciding about promotion of an with these changes. For example, 
employee one manager may consider in the absence of Information and 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   32 24-09-2019   12:05:00 PM



Principles of Management 33

Communications Technology (ICT), a cannot be neglected, as businesses 
manager could oversee only a small have to fulfil social and ethical 
work force that too within a narrow responsibilities towards society.
geographical space. The advent of 
ICT has expanded the capability of nature of PrinciPles of 
the managers to preside over large ManageMent
business empires spread across 
the globe. Infosys headquarters in By nature is meant qualities and 
Bangalore boast of the Asia’s largest characteristics of anything. Principles 
flat screen in their conference room are general propositions, which are 
from where their managers can applicable when certain conditions 
interact with their employees and are present. These have been 
customers in all parts of the world. developed on the basis of observation 

In developing an understanding and experimentation as well as 
of the meaning of principles of personal experiences of the managers. 
management, it is also useful to Depending upon how they are 
know what these are not. The derived and how effective they are in 
principles of management should explaining and predicting managerial 
be distinguished from techniques behaviour, they contribute towards 
of management. Techniques are the development of management both 
procedures or methods, which as a science and as an art. Derivation 
involve a series of steps to be taken to of these principles may be said to be 
accomplish desired goals. Principles a matter of science and their creative 
are guidelines to take decisions or application may be regarded as an 
actions while practicing techniques. art. These principles lend credibility 
Likewise, principles should also be of a learnable and teachable discipline 
understood as being distinct from to the practice of management. As 
values. Values are something, which such, ascent to managerial position 
are acceptable or desirable. They may not be a matter of birth, but a 
have moral connotations. Principles matter of requisite qualifications. 
are basic truths or guidelines for Clearly, management principles have 
behaviour. Values are general rules gained importance with increasing 
for behaviour of individuals in society professionalisation of management. 
formed through common practice These principles are guidelines 
whereas principles of management to action. They denote a cause and 
are formed after research in work effect relationship. While functions 
situations, which are technical in of management viz., Planning, 
nature. However, while practicing Organising, Staffing, Directing and 
principles of management values Controlling are the actions to be 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   33 24-09-2019   12:05:00 PM



34 Business Studies

taken while practising management, but do not provide readymade, 
Principles help managers to take straitjacket solutions to all 
decisions while performing these managerial problems. This 
functions. The following points is so because real business 
summarise the nature of principles situations are very complex 
of management. and dynamic and are a result 
 (i) Universal applicability: The of many factors. However, the 

principles of management are importance of principles cannot 
intended to apply to all types of be underestimated because even 
organisations, business as well as a small guideline helps to solve 
non-business, small as well large, a given problem. For example, 
public sector as well as private in dealing with a situation 
sector, manufacturing as well as of conflict between two 
the services sectors. However, departments, a manager may 
the extent of their applicability emphasise the primacy of the 
would vary with the nature of the overall goals of the organisation. 
organisation, business activity,  (iii) Formed by practice and experi­
scale of operations and the like. For mentation: The principles 
example, for greater productivity, of management are formed 
work should be divided into small by experience and collective 
tasks and each employee should wisdom of managers as well as 
be trained to perform his/her experimentation. For example, it 
specialised job. This principle is is a matter of common experience 
applicable to a government office that discipline is indispensable 
where there is a diary/despatch for accomplishing any purpose. 
clerk whose job is to receive and This principle finds mention 
send mail or documents, a data in management theory. On the 
entry operator whose task is to other hand, in order to remedy 
input data on the computer, a peon the problem of fatigue of workers 
and an officer etc. This principle in the factory, an experiment 
is also applicable to a limited may be conducted to see the 
company where there are separate effect of improvement of physical 
departments like Production, conditions to reduce stress.
Finance, Marketing and Research  (iv) Flexibile: The principles of 
and Development etc. Extent of management are not rigid 
division of work, however, may prescriptions, which have to be 
vary from case to case. followed absolutely. They are 

 (ii) General guidelines: The prin- flexible and can be modified by 
ciples are guidelines to action the manager when the situation 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   34 24-09-2019   12:05:00 PM



Principles of Management 35

so demands. They give the number of cases. As such, they 
manager enough discretion to tell us if a particular principle 
do so. For example, the degree was applied in a particular 
of concentration of authority situation, what would be its 
(centralisation) or its dispersal likely effect. The principles 
(decentralisation) will depend of management are less than 
upon the situations and perfect since they mainly apply 
circumstances of each enterprise. to human behaviour. In real 
Moreover individual principles life, situations are not identical. 
are like different tools serving So, accurate cause and effect 
different purposes, the manager relationships may be difficult 
has to decide which tool to use to establish. However,principles 
under what circumstances. of management assist 

 (v) Mainly behavioural: Manage- managers in establishing 
ment principles aim at these relationships to some 
influencing behaviour of human extent and are therefore useful. 
beings. Therefore, principles In situations of emergencies, 
of management are mainly it is desirable that someone 
behavioural in nature. It is takes charge and others 
not that these principles do just follow. But in situations 
not pertain to things and requiring cross-functional 
phenomenon at all, it is just a expertise, such as setting up of 
matter of emphasis. Moreover, a new factory, more participative 
principles enable a better approach to decision-making 
understanding of the relationship would be advisable. 
between human and material  (vii) Contingent: The application 
resources in accomplishing of principles of management is 
organisational purposes. For contingent or dependent upon 
example, while planning the the prevailing situation at a 
layout of a factory, orderliness particular point of time. The 
would require that workflows are application of principles has to 
matched by flow of materials and be changed as per requirements. 
movement of men. For example, employees deserve 

 (vi)  Cause and effect relationships: fair and just remuneration. 
The principles of management But what is just and fair is 
are intended to establish determined by multiple factors. 
relationship between cause and They include contribution of the 
effect so that they can be used employee, paying capacity of the 
in similar situations in a large employer and also prevailing 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   35 24-09-2019   12:05:00 PM



36 Business Studies

wage rate for the occupation in the accompanying box. You should 
under consideration. be able to see how she was able to 

Having described the inherent transform a little known sector of 
qualities and characteristics of biotechnology into a very profitable 
management principles, it should company and earn titles which any 
be easy for you to appreciate the one would dream of. 
significance of these principles in From the foregoing story it is 
managerial decision-making. But clear that success of Biocon due to 
before that you can read the following the efforts of Dr. Kiran Mazumdar 
case study of ‘Kiran Mazumdar Shaw was not a mere chance. It 
Shaw’ a highly successful Indian was a sincere effort, which involved 
businesswoman and CEO of ‘Biocon’ application of qualities, which are 

The story of Dr. Kiran Mazumdar Shaw is very inspiring. She foresaw the tremendous 
potential of bio technology when no one dared to think about it. She started her own 
company Biocon India in her garage with a meagre capital of ` 10,000 in collaboration with 
Biocon Bio Chemical’s Limited of Ireland. 

The Company is a pioneer in bringing the benefit of high quality, yet affordable, novel 
biologics and biosimilars to patients in India and other emerging markets. Today, it is India’s 
largest and fully-integrated biopharmaceutical company that develops, manufactures and 
supplies advanced, life-saving biopharmaceuticals for diabetes, cancer and autoimmune 
conditions at price points that make them affordable and thus accessible.

As an innovation-led organization focused on providing affordable access, we have 
leveraged our inherent strengths in advanced science to develop, manufacture and deliver 
a rich portfolio of Small Molecules APIs & Formulations and Complex Biologics - both 
Novels and Biosimilars – including Monoclonal Antibodies (MAbs), rh-insulin and Insulin 
Analogs.

The company’s global scale capacities for manufacturing high quality, affordable biologics 
have positioned the company as the world’s fourth largest insulins producer, enabling us 
to address the growing needs of diabetes patients across the globe. As one of the leading 
oncology companies in India, the company has brought safe, efficacious and affordable 
medicines for cancer to cater to the needs of patients, caregivers and medical practitioners 
in the country.

http://biocon.com/https://www.biocon.com/biocon_aboutus_people_bod.asp

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   36 24-09-2019   12:05:00 PM



Principles of Management 37

a part of management principles such management principles 
directly or indirectly. Now you can see increase managerial efficiency. 
the significance of these principles. For example, a manager can 

s leave routine decision-making 
ignificance of PrinciPles to his subordinates and deal 

of ManageMent with exceptional situations 
The principles of management derive which require her/his expertise 
their significance from their utility. They by following the principles of 
provide useful insights to managerial delegation. 
behaviour and influence managerial 
practices. Managers may apply these  (ii) Optimum utilisation of resources 
principles to fulfil their tasks and and effective administration: 
responsibilities. Principles guide Resources both human and 
managers in taking and implementing material available with the 
decisions. It may be appreciated that company are limited. They have 
everything worthwhile is governed by to be put to optimum use. By 
an underlying principle. The quest optimum use we mean that the 
of the management theorists has resources should be put to use 
been and should be to unearth the in such a manner that they 
underlying principles with a view to should give maximum benefit 
using these under repetitive circums- with minimum cost. Principles 
tances as a matter of management equip the managers to foresee 
habit. The significance of principles the cause and effect relationships 
of management can be discussed in of their decisions and actions. 
terms of the following points: As such the wastages associated 

with a trial-and-error approach 
 (i) Providing managers with useful can be overcome. Effective 

insights into reality: The principles administration necessitates 
of management provide the impersonalisation of managerial 
managers with useful insights conduct so that managerial 
into real world situations. power is used with due discretion. 
Adherence to these principles will Principles of management limit 
add to their knowledge, ability the boundary of managerial 
and understanding of managerial discretion so that their decisions 
situations and circumstances. may be free from personal 
It will also enable managers prejudices and biases. For 
to learn from past mistakes example, in deciding the annual 
and conserve time by solving budgets for different departments, 
recurring problems quickly. As rather than personal preferences, 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   37 24-09-2019   12:05:01 PM



38 Business Studies

managerial discretion is bounded Limited in divesting non-core 
by the principle of contribution businesses of chemicals and 
to organisational objectives. seeds. Some companies are 

 (iii) Scientific decisions: Decisions outsourcing their non-core 
must be based on facts, thoughtful activities like share-transfer 
and justifiable in terms of the management and advertising to 
intended purposes. They must outside agencies. So much so, that 
be timely, realistic and subject even core processes such as R&D, 
to measurement and evaluation. manufacturing and marketing 
Management principles help in are being outsourced today. 
thoughtful decision-making. Haven’t you heard of proliferation 
They emphasise logic rather of ‘Business Process Outsourcing’ 
than blind faith. Management (BPO) and ‘Knowledge Process 
decisions taken on the basis of Outsourcing’ (KPO)?
principles are free from bias and  (v) Fulfilling social responsibility: 
prejudice. They are based on The increased awareness of 
the objective assessment of the the public, forces businesses 
situation. especially limited companies to 

 (iv) Meeting changing environment fulfill their social responsibilities. 
requirements: Although the Management theory and 
principles are in the nature management principles have 
of general guidelines but they also evolved in response to 
are modified and as such help these demands. Moreover, the 
managers to meet changing interpretation of the principles 
requirements of the environment. also assumes newer and 
You have already studied that contemporary meanings with 
management principles are the change in time. So, if one 
flexible to adapt to dynamic were to talk of ‘equity’ today, it 
business environment. For does not apply to wages alone. 
example, management principles Value to the customer, care for 
emphasise division of work and the environment, dealings with 
specialisation. In modern times business associates would all 
this principle has been extended come under the purview of this 
to the entire business whereby principle. As an application 
companies are specialising in of this principle, we find that 
their core competency and Public Sector Undertakings 
divesting non-core businesses. have developed entire townships 
In this context, one may cite as, for example, BHEL has 
the decision of Hindustan Lever developed Ranipur in Hardwar 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   38 24-09-2019   12:05:01 PM



Principles of Management 39

(Uttaranchal). One may also cite    These principles enable 
the story of Shri Mahila Griha refinement of management 
Udyog Lijjat Papad as can be practices as well by facilitating the 
seen in the accompanying box development of new management 
on page 41. techniques. Thus, we see that 

 (vi) Management training, education techniques like Operations 
and research: Principles of Research (OR), cost accounting, 
management are at the core of ‘Just in Time’, ‘Kanban’ and ‘Kaizen’ 
management theory. As such have developed due to further 
these are used as a basis for research on these principles. 
management training, education In conclusion it can be said that 
and research. You must be aware understanding the meaning, nature 
that entrance to management and significance of principles 
institutes is preceded by of management will help us to 
management aptitude tests. Do appreciate their applicability in real 
you think that these tests could life situations. 
have been developed without an As stated at the beginning of the 
understanding of management chapter, management principles have 
principles and how they may be undergone a long history of evolution. 
applied in different situations? And, they continue to evolve. What 
These principles provide basic follows is a description of the 
groundwork for the development management principles pertaining to 
of management as a discipline. the classical school; more precisely, 
Professional courses such those propounded by F.W. Taylor and 
as MBA (Master of Business Henri Fayol.
Administration), BBA (Bachelor taylor’s scientific 
of Business Administration) also 
teach these principles as part ManageMent 
of their curriculum at the Scientific management refers to an 
beginner’s level. important stream of one of the earlier 

Test Your Understanding
1. Do you think innovativeness evident from the 

examples of Toyota and Kiran Mazumdar Shaw can be 
linked to the nature of management principles? 

2. To what aspects of the significance of management 
principles would you attribute the endeavours of 
BHEL and Shri Mahila Griha Udyog Lijjat Papad?

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   39 24-09-2019   12:05:01 PM



40 Business Studies

Shri Mahila Griha Udyog Lijjat Papad- Combining 
business with social responsibility (An organization of 

the women, by the women and for the women)

The story of Shri Mahila Griha Udyog lijjat Papad is very inspiring for would-be 
managers. It shows how an organisation can combine business with social 
responsibility and make its stakeholders self-reliant. The stakeholders are 
various women who, numbering over 45,000, are given the task of making 
lijjat papads, which are famous for their quality throughout the world.    The 
organisation started with a modest loan of Rs 80 and is now worth around Rs 
650 crores. Its exports exceed Rs 60 crores. Their exports are made through 
Merchant Exporters to countries like UK, USA, Middle East Countries, 
Thailand, Singapore, Hongkong, Holland, Japan, Australia and other Countries.

One of the main reasons for their success can be attributed to their core 
values to which they have stuck to since its inception in 1959. It has shown 
how it is possible to combine Gandhian values with business. Shri Mahila Griha 
Udyog Lijjat Papad is a synthesis of three different concepts (core values) 
namely: 

1. The concept of business 
2. The concept of family 
3. The concept of devotion 
All these concepts are uniformly followed in this institution. As a result of 

this synthesis, a peculiar Lijjat way of thinking has developed therein.
Besides the concept of business, the institution along with all its member 

sisters has adopted the concept of mutual family affection, concern and trust. 
All the affairs of the institution are dealt with in a manner similar to that of a 
family carrying out its own daily household chores. But the most important 
concept adopted by the institution is the concept of devotion. For the member-
sisters, employees and well-wishers, the institution is never merely a place to 
earn one’s livelihood — it is a place of worship to devote one’s energy not for 
his or her own benefits but for the benefit of all. Lijjat’ provides scholarships 
to the children of the papad roller sister members who pass out in 10th and 
12th standard every year so as to enable the Lady Members to encourage their 
children for education. 

Source: Adapted from http/www.lijjat.com

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   40 24-09-2019   12:05:01 PM



Principles of Management 41

schools of thought of management who sought to improve industrial 
referred to as the ‘Classical’ school. efficiency. In 1874, he became an 
The other two streams belonging apprentice mechanist, learning 
to the classical school are Fayol’s factory conditions at the grass 
Administrative Theory and Max roots level. He earned a degree in 
Weber’s Bureaucracy. We will not mechanical engineering. He was 
be describing bureaucracy here. one of the intellectual leaders of 
A discussion of Fayol’s principles, the efficiency movement and was 
however, will follow the discussion of highly influential in reshaping the 
scientific management. factory system of production. You 

Fredrick Winslow Taylor (March must appreciate that he belonged to 
20,1856 – March 21, 1915) was the era of the industrial revolution 
an American mechanical engineer characterised by mass production. 

Fredrick Winslow Taylor – 
Founder of Scientific Management Movement
LIFE TIME: March 20,1856 to March 21, 1915
PROFESSION: American mechanical engineer
EDUCATION: Degree in Mechanical  Engineering from Stevens Institute 
of  Technology in 1883. 
POSITIONS HELD— 
1. Apprentice Machinist in 1874.
2. Executive at Midville Steel Company in 1884.
3. At Bethlehem Iron Company in 1898, which later became Bethlehem 

Steel Company.
4. Professor at ‘Tuck School of Business’ founded in 1900.
5. President of ‘American Society of Mechanical Engineers’ from 1906 to 

1907.
WRITINGS:1. ‘The Principles of Scientific Management’ series of articles 
published in ‘The American Magazine’
During march-may 1911, later published in book form.
1. ‘Concrete, Plain and Reinforced’ in 1906.
2. ‘Notes on Belting’ in 1893
3. ‘On the Art of Cutting Metals’ December 1906.
4. ‘A Piece Rate System’ in June 1895.
5. ‘The making of a putting green’ a series of articles published in 1915.
6. ‘Not for the genius but for the average man’ published in ‘The 

American Magazine’ in March 1918.

Adapted from www.wikipedia.org and www.stevens.edu/library

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   41 24-09-2019   12:05:01 PM



42 Business Studies

You must also appreciate that every abilities. He instructed his fellow 
new development takes some time to workers to work in phases. He joined 
be perfected. Taylor’s contribution the Bethlehem Iron Company in 
must be seen in the light of the efforts 1898, which later became Bethlehem 
made to perfect the factory system of Steel Company. He was originally 
production. employed to introduce piece rate 

Taylor thought that by scientifically wage system. After setting up 
analysing work, it would be possible the wage system, he was given 
to find ‘one best way’ to do it. authority and more responsibilities 
He is most remembered for his time in the company. Using his newfound 
and motion studies. He would break resources he increased the staff and 
a job into its component parts and made Bethlehem a show place for 
measure each to the second. inventive work. Unfortunately, the 

Taylor believed that contemporary company was sold to another group 
management was amateurish and and he was discharged.
should be studied as a discipline. In 1910 his health started to fall. 
He also wanted that workers should He died in 1915 due to pneumonia. A 
cooperate with the management and synoptic view of his contribution can 
thus there would be no need of trade be had from the accompanying box 
unions. The best results would come on the next page. 
from the partnership between a trained PrinciPles of scientific 
and qualified management and a 
cooperative and innovative workforce. ManageMent
Each side needed the other. In the earlier days of the Industrial 

He is known for coinage of the Revolution, in the absence of 
term ‘Scientific Management’ in his an established theory of factory 
article ‘The Principles of Scientific organisation, factory owners or 
Management’ published in 1911. managers relied on personal judgment 
After being fired from Bethlehem Steel in attending to the problems they 
Company he wrote a book ‘Shop floor’ confronted in the course of managing 
which sold well. He was selected to be their work. This is what is referred to 
the president of the American Society as ‘rule of thumb’. Managing factories 
of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) from by rule of thumb enabled them to 
1906 to 1907. He was a professor at handle the situations as they arose 
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth but suffered from the limitation of a 
College founded in 1900. trial and error approach. For their 

In 1884 he became an executive experiences to be emulated, it was 
at Midvale Steel Company by important to know what works and 
demonstrating his leadership why does it work. For this, there was 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   42 24-09-2019   12:05:01 PM



Principles of Management 43

Taylor’s Contribution to Scientific Management
The following extracts are taken from Taylor’s testimony before the U.S. 
House of Representatives Special Committee in 1912 and also from his most 
important work “THE PRINCIPLES OF SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT” 
published in 1911.

“Scientific management requires first, a careful investigation of each of the 
many modifications of the same implement, developed under rule of thumb; 
and second, after time and motion study has been made of the speed attainable 
with each of these implements, that the good points of several of them shall be 
unified in a single standard implementation, which will enable the workman to 
work faster and with greater ease than he could before. This one implement, 
then is adopted as standard in place of the many different kinds before in use and 
it remains standard for all workmen to use until superseded by an implement 
which has been shown, through motion and time study, to be still better.” 
(Scientific management, page 119)

The main elements of the Scientific Management are: (page 129-130  
sci-mgt) “Time Studies”

Functional or specialised supervision 
Standardisation of tools and implements 
Standardisation of work methods
Separate Planning function
Management by exception principle
The use of ‘slide-rules and similar time-saving devices’ 
Instruction cards for workmen
Task allocation and large bonus for successful performance 
The use of the ‘differential rate’
Mnemonic systems for classifying products and implements 
A routing system
A modern costing system etc. etc. 
Taylor called these elements “merely the elements or details of the 

mechanisms of management” He saw them as extensions of the four principles 
of management. (Page 130, scientific management)
1. The development of a true science.
2. The scientific selection of the workman.
3. The scientific education and development of the workman.
4. Intimate and friendly cooperation between the management and the 

employees.

Adapted from Taylorism (F.W. Taylor & Scientific Management) at 
http://www.quality.org/TQM-MSI/taylor.html

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   43 24-09-2019   12:05:01 PM



44 Business Studies

a need to follow an approach that indigenous rules of thumb, it is 
was based on the method of science- but a statement of the obvious 
defining a problem, developing that all would not be equally 
alternative solutions, anticipating effective. Taylor believed that 
consequences, measuring progress there was only one best method 
and drawing conclusions. to maximise efficiency. This 

In this scenario, Taylor emerged as method can be developed through 
the ‘Father of Scientific Management’. study and analysis. The method 
He proposed scientific management so developed should substitute 
as opposed to rule of thumb. He ‘Rule of Thumb’ throughout 
broke up human activity into small the organisation. Scientific 
parts and found out how it could be method involved investigation 
done effectively, in less time and with of traditional methods through 
increased productivity. It implies work-study, unifying the best 
conducting business activities practices and developing a 
according to standardised tools, standard method, which would 
methods and trained personnel in be followed throughout the 
order to increase the output, improve organisation. According to 
its quality and reduce costs and Taylor, even a small production 
wastes. activity like loading pigs of iron 

In the words of Taylor, “Scientific into boxcars can be scientifically 
management means knowing exactly planned and managed. This can 
what you want men to do and seeing result in tremendous saving of 
that they do it in the best and cheapest human energy as well as wastage 
way. The Bethlehem Steel company of time and materials. The more 
where Taylor himself worked achieved sophisticated the processes, 
three-fold increase in productivity by greater would be the savings.
application of scientific management    In the present context, the 
principles. Therefore, it would be in use of Internet has brought 
order to discuss these principles. about dramatic improvements 
 (i) Science not Rule of Thumb: in internal efficiencies and 

Taylor pioneered the introduction customer satisfaction. 
of the method of scientific  (ii) Harmony, Not Discord: Factory 
inquiry into the domain of system of production implied that 
management practice. We have managers served as a link between 
already referred to the limitations the owners and the workers. 
of the rule of thumb approach Since as managers they had the 
of management. As different mandate to ‘get work done’ from 
managers would follow their the workers, it should not be 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   44 24-09-2019   12:05:01 PM



Principles of Management 45

difficult for you to appreciate that state, Taylor called for complete 
there always existed the possibility mental revolution on the part of 
of a kind of class-conflict, the both management and workers. 
mangers versus workers. Taylor It means that management and 
recognised that this conflict workers should transform their 
helped none, the workers, the thinking. In such a situation 
managers or the factory owners. even trade unions will not think 
He emphasised that there should of going on strike etc.
be complete harmony between    Management should share the 
the management and workers. gains of the company, if any, with 
Both should realise that each the workers. At the same time 
one is important. To achieve this workers should work hard and 

Sharing of gains between management and 
workers leading to complete harmony

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   45 24-09-2019   12:05:02 PM



46 Business Studies

be willing to embrace change for their suggestions which results 
the good of the company. Both in substantial reduction in 
should be part of the family. costs. They should be part 
According to Taylor, ‘Scientific of management and, if any 
management has for its important decisions are taken, 
foundation the firm conviction workers should be taken into 
that the true interests of the confidence.
two are one and the same; that    At the same time workers 
prosperity for the employer should desist from going on 
cannot exist for a long time unless strike and making unreasonable 
it is accompanied by prosperity demands on the management. 
for the employees and vice In fact when there will be open 
versa’. communication system and 

   Japanese work culture is a goodwill there will be no need for 
classic example of such a even a trade union. Paternalistic 
situation. In Japanese companies, style of management, whereby 
paternalistic style of management the employer takes care of the 
is in practice. There is complete needs of employees, would 
openness between the manage- prevail as in the case of Japanese 
ment and workers. If at all companies.
workers go to strike they wear a    According to Taylor, there 
black badge but work more than should be an almost equal division 
normal working hours to gain the of work and responsibility between 
sympathy of the management. workers and management. All the 

 (iii) Cooperation, Not Individualism: day long the management should 
There should be complete work almost side by side with the 
cooperation between the labour workers helping, encouraging and 
and the management instead smoothing the way for them.
of individualism. This principle is  (iv) Development of Each and Every 
an extension of principle of Person to His or Her Greatest 
‘Harmony not discord’. Competition Efficiency and Prosperity: 
should be replaced by cooperation. Industrial efficiency depends 
Both should realise that they need to a large extent on personnel 
each other. competencies. As such, 

   For this, management should scientific management also 
not close its ears to any stood for worker development. 
constructive suggestions Worker training was essential 
made by the employees. also to learn the ‘best method’ 
They should be rewarded for developed as a consequence of 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   46 24-09-2019   12:05:02 PM



Principles of Management 47

the scientific approach. Taylor planning, implementation and 
was of the view that the concern control. Thus, Taylor concentrated 
for efficiency could be built on improving the performance of this 
in right from the process of role in the factory set-up. In fact, he 
employee selection. Each person identified a list of qualities of a good 
should be scientifically selected. foreman/supervisor and found that no 
Then work assigned should single person could fit them all. This 
suit her/his physical, mental prompted him to suggest functional 
and intellectual capabilities. To foremanship through eight persons.
increase efficiency, they should Taylor advocated separation of 
be given the required training. planning and execution functions. 
Efficient employees would This concept was extended to the 
produce more and earn more. lowest level of the shop floor. It was 
This will ensure their greatest known as functional foremanship. 
efficiency and prosperity for both Under the factory manager there was 
company and workers. a planning incharge and a production 

From the foregoing discussion it incharge. Under planning incharge 
is clear that Taylor was an ardent four personnel namely instruction 
supporter of use of scientific method card clerk, route clerk, time and cost 
of production in business. clerk and a disciplinarian worked. 

These four personnel would draft 
techniques of scientific instructions for the workers, specify 
ManageMent the route of production, prepare 

time and cost sheet and ensure 
Let us now discuss techniques as discipline respectively.
specified by him. These are based on Under Production incharge, 
the various experiments he conducted personnel who would work were 
during his career. speed boss, gang boss, repair boss, 

f and inspector. These respectively 
unctional foreManshiP were responsible for timely and 

In the factory system, the foreman accurate completion of job, keeping 
represents the managerial figure with machines and tools etc., ready for 
whom the workers are in face-to-face operation by workers, ensure proper 
contact on a daily basis. In the first working condition of machines and 
chapter of the book, you have seen tools and check the quality of work.
that the foreman is the lowest ranking Functional foremanship is an 
manager and the highest ranking extension of the principle of division 
worker. He is the pivot around of work and specialisation to the 
whom revolves the entire production shop floor. Each worker will have to 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   47 24-09-2019   12:05:02 PM



48 Business Studies

Factory Manager

Planning Incharge Production Incharge

Instruction Route Time and Speed Gang Repairs 
Card Clerk Clerk Cost Clerk Inspector

Boss Boss Boss

Disciplinarian

Workman

take orders from these eight foremen prevalent under the rule of thumb. 
in the related process or function of The best practices can be kept and 
production. Foremen should have further refined to develop a standard 
intelligence, education, tact, grit, which should be followed throughout 
judgment, special knowledge, manual the organisation. This can be done 
dexterity, and energy, honesty and through work-study techniques which 
good health. Since all these qualities include time study, motion study, 
could not be found in a single person fatigue study and method study, and 
so Taylor proposed eight specialists. which are discussed further in this 
Each specialist is to be assigned chapter. It may be pointed out that 
work according to her/his qualities. even the contemporary techniques 
For example, those with technical of business process including 
mastery, intelligence and grit may reengineering, kaizen (continuous 
be given planning work. Those with improvement) and benchmarking are 
energy and good health may be aimed at standardising the work. 
assigned execution work. Standardisation refers to the process 

of setting standards for every business 
standardisation and activity; it can be standardisation of 

process, raw material, time, product, 
siMPlification of Work machinery, methods or working 
Taylor was an ardent supporter of conditions. These standards are the 
standardisation. According to him benchmarks, which must be adhered 
scientific method should be used to during production. The objectives of 
to analyse methods of production standardisation are: 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   48 24-09-2019   12:05:02 PM



Principles of Management 49

 (i) To reduce a given line or Company used this concept very 
product to fixed types, sizes and successfully. Even now auto 
characteristics. companies are using it.

 (ii) To establish interchange ability The objective of the whole exercise is 
of manufactured parts and to minimise the cost of production and 
products. maximise the quality and satisfaction 

 (iii) To establish standards of exce­ of the customer. For this purpose 
llence and quality in materials. many techniques like process charts 

 (iv) To establish standards of perfor­ and operations research etc are used.
mance of men and machines. For designing a car, the assembly 

Simplification aims at eliminating line production would entail deciding 
superfluous varieties, sizes and dim­ the sequence of operations, place for 
ensions while standardisation implies men, machines and raw materials 
devising new varieties instead of the etc. All this is part of method study.
existing ones. Simplification aims at 
eliminating unnecessary diversity of Motion Study
products. It results in savings of cost of Motion study refers to the study of 
labour, machines and tools. It implies movements like lifting, putting objects, 
reduced inventories, fuller utilisation of sitting and changing positions, etc., 
equipment and increasing turnover. which are undertaken while doing a 

Most large companies like Nokia, typical job. Unnecessary movements 
Toyota and Microsoft, etc. have are sought to be eliminated so that 
successfully implemented standardi­ it takes less time to complete the job 
sation and simplification. This is efficiently. For example, Taylor and his 
evident from their large share in their associate Frank Gailberth were able to 
respective markets. reduce motions in brick layering from 

18 to just 5. Taylor demonstrated that 
Method Study productivity increased to about four 
The objective of method study is to times by this process.
find out one best way of doing the job. On close examination of body 
There are various methods of doing motions, for example, it is possible to 
the job. To determine the best way find out:
there are several parameters. Right  (i) Motions which are productive
from procurement of raw materials  (ii) Motions which are incidental 
till the final product is delivered to (e.g., going to stores)
the customer every activity is part  (iii) Motions which are unproductive.
of method study. Taylor devised Taylor used stopwatches and various 
the concept of assembly line by symbols and colours to identify 
using method study. Ford Motor different motions. Through motion 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   49 31-10-2019   10:08:20 AM



50 Business Studies

studies, Taylor was able to design rest intervals will help one to regain 
suitable equipment and tools to stamina and work again with the same 
educate workers on their use. The capacity. This will result in increased 
results achieved by him were truly productivity. Fatigue study seeks to 
remarkable. determine the amount and frequency 

of rest intervals in completing a task. 
tiMe study For example, normally in a plant, 
It determines the standard time taken work takes place in three shifts of 
to perform a well-defined job. Time eight hours each. Even in a single 
measuring devices are used for each shift a worker has to be given some 
element of task. The standard time rest interval to take her/his lunch 
is fixed for the whole of the task by etc. If the work involves heavy manual 
taking several readings. The method labour then small pauses have to be 
of time study will depend upon frequently given to the worker so that 
volume and frequency of the task, the she/he can recharge her/his energy 
cycle time of the operation and time level for optimum contribution. 
measurement costs. The objective There can be many causes for 
of time study is to determine the fatigue like long working hours, 
number of workers to be employed; doing unsuitable work, having 
frame suitable incentive schemes uncordial relations with the boss or 
and determine labour costs. bad working conditions etc. Such 

For example, on the basis of hindrances in good performance 
several observations it is determined should be removed.
that standard time taken by the 
worker to make one cardboard box is differential Piece Wage 
20 minutes. So in one hour she/he 
will make 3 boxes. Assuming that a systeM
worker has to put in 8 hours of work Taylor was a strong advocate of 
in a shift and deducting one hour for piece wage system. He wanted to 
rest and lunch, it is determined that differentiate between efficient and 
in 7 hours a worker makes 21 boxes inefficient workers. The standard 
@ 3 boxes per hour. Now this is the time and other parameters should be 
standard task a worker has to do. determined on the basis of the work-
Wages can be decided accordingly. study discussed above. The workers 

can then be classified as efficient 
fatigue study or inefficient on the basis of these 
A person is bound to feel tired standards. He wanted to reward 
physically and mentally if she/he efficient workers. So he introduced 
does not rest while working. The different rate of wage payment for 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   50 24-09-2019   12:05:02 PM



Principles of Management 51

those who performed above standard rather than quarrelling over the 
and for those who performed share in the resultant surplus, the 
below standard. For example, it is workers and managers should work 
determined that standard output per in harmony for maximising the output 
worker per day is 10 units and those rather than restricting it. Clearly the 
who made standard or more than sum and substance of Taylor’s ideas 
standard will get Rs. 50 per unit and lies not in the disjointed description of 
those below will get Rs. 40 per unit. principles and techniques of scientific 
Now an efficient worker making 11 management, but in the change of 
units will get 11�50= Rs. 550 per day the mindset, which he referred to as 
whereas a worker who makes 9 units mental revolution. Mental revolution 
will get 9××�40 = Rs. 360 per day. involves a change in the attitude of 

According to Taylor, the difference workers and management towards 
of Rs. 190 should be enough for the one another from competition to 
inefficient worker to be motivated cooperation. Both should realise that 
to perform better. From his own they require one another. Both should 
experience, Taylor gives the example of aim to increase the size of surplus. 
a worker named Schmidt who was able This would eliminate the need for any 
to earn 60% more wages from $1.15 to agitation. Management should share a 
$1.85 on increasing pig iron loading part of surplus with workers. Workers 
from 12.5 tons per man per day to 47 should also contribute their might 
tons per man per day in box cars at so that the company makes profits. 
Bethlehem Steel works by following This attitude will be good for both of 
scientific management techniques. them and also for the company. In the 

It is important to have a relook at the long run only worker’s well-being will 
techniques of scientific management ensure prosperity of the business. 
as comprising a unified whole of Now, having studied the elements, 
Taylor’s prescription of efficiency. principles and techniques of scientific 
Search for efficiency requires the management we can consider the 
search for one best method and the practical applications of the same at the 
chosen method must lead to the time of F.W. Taylor and in the present.
determination of a fair day’s work. We can also examine the present 
There must be a compensation system status of scientific management. 
that differentiates those who are able Today, many new techniques have 
to accomplish/exceed the fair day’s been developed as a sequel to scientific 
work. This differential system must be management. Operations research 
based on the premise that efficiency was developed in the second World 
is the result of the joint efforts of the War to optimise the deployment of war 
managers and the workers. Thus, material. Similarly assembly line was 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   51 24-09-2019   12:05:02 PM



52 Business Studies

also discovered by F.W. Taylor, which fayol’s PrinciPles of 
was used very successfully by Ford 
motor company for manufacturing ManageMent
‘Model T’ car for the masses. This In the development of classical school 
concept is much used now. The latest of management thought, Fayol’s 
development in scientific management administrative theory provides 
is ‘LEAN MANUFACTURING’. Now an important link. While Taylor 
a days robotics and computers are succeeded in revolutionising the 
being used in production and other working of factory shop-floor in terms 
business activities. This is part of devising the best method, fair day’s 
of scientific management of these work, differential piece-rate system 
activities. It has increased productivity and functional foremanship; Henri 
levels. The techniques of operation Fayol explained what amounts to a 
research have also been developed managers work and what principles 
and are being used as a result of should be followed in doing this work. 
scientific management. The box below If workers’ efficiency mattered in the 
gives meanings of some terms used in factory system, so does the managerial 
modern manufacturing. efficiency. Fayol’s contribution must 

Applications of Scientific Management 
by Taylor and his Contemporaries

1. Taylor found out the optimum-shovelling load of 21 pounds per shovel per 
worker through a series of experiments in work-study at Bethlehem Steel 
Company. The implementation saved the company $ 75000 to $80000 per 
year.

2. Pig iron handling per person per day was increased from 12.5 tons to  
47 tons. This also resulted in the wages increase to labourers by 60% but 
also savings to the company on account of less number of labourers from 
500 to 140.

3. He had published a paper “The Art of cutting metals” which turned it into 
a science.

4. He designed a Piece Rate Wage System including incentives for Bethlehem 
Steel Company.

5. Taylor’s associate Frank Gilbreth applied scientific management to the art 
of ‘brick layering’ and through motion study was able to eliminate certain 
motions which were considered by the brick layers to be necessary 
(reduced motions from 18 to 5), designed simple apparatus like adjustable 
scaffold and its packets to hold the bricks and finally also taught brick 
layers to use both the hands at the same time. This is a classic example of 
application of Scientific Management to the simple art of brick layering.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   52 24-09-2019   12:05:02 PM



Principles of Management 53

be interpreted in terms of the impact theories concerning scientific 
that his writings had and continue organisation of labour were widely 
to have improvement in managerial influential in the beginning of 
efficiencies. twentieth century. He graduated from 

Henri Fayol (1841-1925) was a the mining academy of St. Etienne 
French management theorist whose in 1860 in mining engineering. The 

Glossary of Some Terms of Modern 
Production/Scientific Management
1. Just In Time Manufacturing: It is an inventory management strategy to 

improve return on investment by reducing in process inventory and its 
associated costs. The system is implemented by the use of visual signals or 
KANBAN, which tells whether the replenishment is required at any level 
of production process, or not.

2. Lean Manufacturing: It is a management philosophy focusing on reduction of 
seven wastes of overproduction, waiting time, transportation, processing, 
motion, inventory and scrap in any type of manufacturing process or any 
type of business. By eliminating waste, quality is improved, production 
time is reduced and cost is reduced.

3. Kaizen: It is a Japanese word, which means ‘change for better’ or 
‘improvement’. It is an approach to improvement of productivity through 
application of works of American experts such as F.W. Taylor by Japanese 
after World War II. The goals of kaizen include elimination of waste (which 
is defined as those activities which add cost but not value to the product 
or service), just in time delivery, production load levelling of amount and 
types, standardised work, paced moving lines, right sized equipment and 
others. A closer Japanese use of the word means ‘to take apart and put it 
in a better way’. What is taken apart is usually a process, system, product 
or service. It is a daily activity which humanizes the workplace, eliminates 
hard work both physical and mental, teaches people how to do rapid 
experiments using scientific method and how to learn to see and eliminate 
waste in business processes.

4. Six Sigma: It is a data driven approach that can help any organisation- 
whatever sector or field it might be operating in, to bring down inefficiencies 
and save time and money by reducing ‘quality variations’. It has a strong 
customer oriented approach that relies on data to create more efficient 
processes or refine existing processes. There should not be more than 3-4 
defects per million opportunities according to prescribed norms. It can be 
applied to any process but needs unstilted organisational support.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   53 24-09-2019   12:05:02 PM



54 Business Studies

19 year old engineer started at English as ‘General and Industrial 
the mining company ‘Compagnie Management’ in 1949 and is widely 
de commentary-Fourchambean- considered a foundational work in 
Decazeville, ultimately acting classical management theory. For his 
as its managing director from contribution he is also known as the 
1888 to 1918. ‘Father of General Management’

His theories deal with The 14 principles of management 
organisation of production in the given by him are:
context of a competitive enterprise  (i) Division of Work: Work is 
that has to control its production divided into small tasks/
costs. Fayol was the first to identify jobs. A trained specialist who 
four functions of management – is competent is required to 
Planning, Organising, Directing and perform each job. Thus, division 
Controlling although his version of work leads to specialisation. 
was a bit different – Plan, Organise, According to Fayol, “The intent 
Command, Coordinate and Control. of division of work is to produce 
According to Fayol, all activities more and better work for the 
of an industrial undertaking same effort. Specialisation is 
could be divided into: Technical; the most efficient way to use 
Commercial; Financial; Security; human effort.” 
Accounting and Managerial. He    In business work can be 
also suggested that qualities a performed more efficiently if it 
manager must possess should is divided into specialised tasks; 
be — Physical, Moral, Education, each performed by a specialist 
Knowledge and experience. He or trained employee. This 
believed that the number of results in efficient and effective 
management principles that might output. Thus, in a company we 
help to improve an organisation’s have separate departments 
operation is potentially limitless. for  f inance,  market ing, 

Based largely on his own production and human resource 
experience, he developed his development etc. All of them have 
concept of administration. The specialised persons. Collectively 
14 principles of management they achieve production and 
propounded by him were discussed sales targets of the company. 
in detail in his book published in Fayol applies this principle of 
1917, ‘Administration industrielle division of work to all kinds 
et generale’. It was published in of work – technical as well as 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   54 24-09-2019   12:05:02 PM



Principles of Management 55

Henri Fayol
1. Life Time: 1841 TO 1925
2. Profession: Mining Engineer and Management 

Theorist (French national)
3. Education: Graduated from Mining Academy at St. 

Entinne. in 1880.
4. Positions Held: Founded the mining company 

‘Cmpagnie de Commentry- Fourchambeau-
Decazeville’ and became its Managing Director in 
1888 and remained till 1918.

5. Writings: Administration industrielle et générale. It 
was published in English as General and Industrial 
Management in 1949 and is widely considered a 
foundational work in classical management theory.

6. Contributions: Mainly 14 Management Principles, which are referred to as 
administrative in nature in that they have Top-Down approach concerning 
top management and other manager’s conduct. 

Source: www.en.wikipedia.org 
Image source: www.image.google.com

managerial. You can observe Authority is both formal and 
this principle at work in any informal. Managers require authority 
organisation like hospital or commensurate with their responsibility. 
even a government office. There should be a balance between 

 (ii) Authority and Responsibility: authority and responsibility. An 
According to Fayol, “Authority organisation should build safeguards 
is the right to give orders against abuse of managerial power. At 
and obtain obedience, and the same time a manager should have 
responsibility is the corollary necessary authority to carry out his 
of authority. The two types of responsibility. For example, a sales 
authority are official authority, manager has to negotiate a deal with 
which is the authority to a buyer. She finds that if she can offer 
command, and personal credit period of 60 days she is likely to 
authority which is the authority clinch the deal which is supposed to 
of the individual manager.” fetch the company net margin of say 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   55 24-09-2019   12:05:02 PM



56 Business Studies

` 50 crores. Now the company gives without any prejudice towards 
power to the manager to offer a credit one another.
period of only 40 days. This shows  (iv) Unity of Command: According 
that there is an imbalance in authority to Fayol there should be one and 
and responsibility. In this case the only one boss for every individual 
manager should be granted authority employee. If an employee gets 
of offering credit period of 60 days in orders from two superiors at the 
the interest of the company. Similarly, same time the principle of unity 
in this example this manager should of command is violated. The 
not be given a power to offer a credit principle of unity of command 
period of say 100 days because it is states that each participant in 
not required. A manager should have a formal organisation should 
the right to punish a subordinate for receive orders from and be 
wilfully not obeying a legitimate order responsible to only one superior. 
but only after sufficient opportunity Fayol gave a lot of importance to 
has been given to a subordinate for this principle. He felt that if this 
presenting her/his case. principle is violated “authority 
 (iii) Discipline: Discipline is the is undermined, discipline is 

obedience to organisational rules in jeopardy, order disturbed 
and employment agreement which and stability threatened”. The 
are necessary for the working of principle resembles military 
the organisation. According to organisation. Dual subordination 
Fayol, discipline requires good should be avoided. This is to 
superiors at all levels, clear and prevent confusion regarding 
fair agreements and judicious tasks to be done. Suppose a 
application of penalties. sales person is asked to clinch 

   Suppose management and a deal with a buyer and is 
labour union have entered into allowed to give 10% discount 
an agreement whereby workers by the marketing manager. But 
have agreed to put in extra hours finance department tells her/
without any additional payment him not to offer more than 5% 
to revive the company out of discount. Now there is no unity 
loss. In return the management of command. This can be avoided 
has promised to increase wages if there is coordination between 
of the workers when this mission various departments.
is accomplished. Here discipline  (v) Unity of Direction: All the 
when applied would mean that units of an organisation should 
the workers and management be moving towards the same 
both honour their commitments objectives through coordinated 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   56 24-09-2019   12:05:03 PM



Principles of Management 57

and focussed efforts. Each group its own objectives. For example, 
of activities having the same the company would want to 
objective must have one head get maximum output from its 
and one plan. This ensures employees at a competitive cost 
unity of action and coordination. (salary). On the other hand, 
For example, if a company is an employee may want to get 
manufacturing motorcycles as maximum salary while working 
well as cars then it should have the least. In another situation an 
two separate divisions for both individual employee may demand 
of them. Each division should some concession, which is not 
have its own incharge, plans admissible to any other employee 
and execution resources. On no like working for less time. 
account should the working of    In all the situations the 
two divisions overlap. Now let interests of the group/company 
us differentiate between the two will supersede the interest of 
principles of unity of command any one individual. This is 
and unity of direction. so because larger interests of 

 (vi) Subordination of Individual the workers and stakeholders 
Interest to General Interest: are more important than the 
The interests of an organisation interest of any one person. For 
should take priority over the example, interests of various 
interests of any one individual stakeholders, i.e., owners, 
employee according to Fayol. shareholders, creditors, debtors, 
Every worker has some financers, tax authorities, 
individual interest for working in customers and the society at 
a company. The company has got large cannot be sacrificed for 

Difference betweeen Unity of Command and Unity of Direction

Basis Unity of Command Unity of Direction

One subordinate should Each group of activities 
receive orders from and having same objective must 

1. Meaning
should be responsible to have one head and one 
only one superior. plan.

It prevents dual It prevents overlapping of 
2. Aim

subordination. activities.

It affects an individual It affects the entire 
3. Implications

employee. organisation.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   57 28-10-2019   4:51:30 PM



58 Business Studies

one individual or a small group subordinate involvement through 
of individuals who want to exert decentra lisation with managers’ 
pressure on the company. A retention of final authority 
manager can ensure this by through centralisation.” The 
her/his exemplary behaviour. degree of centralisation will 
For example, she/he should not depend upon the circumstances 
fall into temptation of misusing in which the company is working. 
her/his powers for individual/ In general large organisations 
family benefit at the cost of larger have more decentralisation than 
general interest of the workers/ small organisations. For example, 
company. This will raise her/his panchayats in our country have 
stature in the eyes of the workers been given more powers to 
and at the same time ensure decide and spend funds granted 
same behaviour by them. to them by the government 

 (vii) Remuneration of Employees: for the welfare of villages. 
The overall pay and compensation This is decentralisation at the 
should be fair to both employees national level.
and the organisation. The  (ix) Scalar Chain: An organisation 
employees should be paid fair consists of superiors and 
wages, which should give them subordinates. The formal lines of 
at least a reasonable standard of authority from highest to lowest 
living. At the same time it should ranks are known as scalar chain.
be within the paying capacity of    According to Fayol, “Organisa-
the company. In other words, tions should have a chain of 
remuneration should be just authority and communication 
and equitable. This will ensure that runs from top to bottom and 
congenial atmosphere and good should be followed by managers 
relations between workers and and the subordinates.”
management. Consequently, the    Let us consider a situation where 
working of the company would there is one head ‘A’ who has 
be smooth. two lines of authority under her/

 (viii)Centralisation and Decentr­ him. One line consists of B-C-
alisation: The concentration of D-E-F. Another line of authority 
decision-making authority is under ‘A’ is L-M-N-O-P. If ‘E’ has 
called centralisation whereas to communicate with ‘O’ who is 
its dispersal among more at the same level of authority 
than one person is  known as then she/he has to traverse the 
decentralisation. According to route E-D-C-B-A-L-M-N-O. This 
Fayol, “There is a need to balance is due to the principle of scalar 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   58 24-09-2019   12:05:03 PM



Principles of Management 59

A  (x) Order: According to Fayol, 
“People and materials must be 
in suitable places at appropriate 

B L time for maximum efficiency.” 
The principle of order states that 
‘A place for everything (everyone) 

C M and everything (everyone) in its 
(her/his) place’. Essentially it 

D N means orderliness. If there is a 
fixed place for everything and it 
is present there, then there will 

E O be no hindrance in the activities 
of business/ factory. This will 

F P lead to increased productivity 
and efficiency.

 (xi) Equity: Good sense and 
Fayol’s Scalar Chain experience are needed to ensure 

fairness to all employees, who 
chain being followed in this should be treated as fairly as 
situation. According to Fayol, possible,” according to Fayol. 
this chain should not be violated This principle emphasises 
in the normal course of formal kindliness and justice in the 
communication. However, if there behaviour of managers towards 
is an emergency then ‘E’ can workers. This will ensure 
directly contact ‘O’ through ‘Gang loyalty and devotion. Fayol 
Plank’ as shown in the diagram. does not rule out use of force 
This is a shorter route and sometimes. Rather he says that 
has been provided so that lazy personnel should be dealt 
communication is not delayed. with sternly to send the message 
In practice you find that a worker that everyone is equal in the 
cannot directly contact the CEO eyes of the management. There 
of the company. If at all she/he should be no discrimination 
has to, then all the formal levels against anyone on account of 
i.e., foreman, superintendent, sex, religion, language, caste, 
manager, director etc have belief or nationality etc. In 
to know about the matter. practice we can observe that 
However, in an emergency it can now a days in multinational 
be possible that a worker can corporations people of various 
contact CEO directly. nationalities work together in a 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   59 24-09-2019   12:05:03 PM



60 Business Studies

discrimination free environment. position for a minimum fixed 
Equal opportunities are available tenure. They should have stability 
for everyone in such companies of tenure. They should be given 
to rise. reasonable time to show results. 

 (xii) Stability of Personnel: “Employee Any adhocism in this regard 
turnover should be minimised will create instability/insecurity 
to maintain organisational among employees. They would 
efficiency”, according to Fayol. tend to leave the organisation. 
Personnel should be selected and Recruitment, selection and 
appointed after due and rigorous training cost will be high. So 
procedure. But once selected stability in tenure of personnel 
they should be kept at their post/ is good for the business.

Employee suggestion system: Encourage 
initiative among trainee managers

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   60 24-09-2019   12:05:05 PM



Principles of Management 61

Fayol: Then and Now
Now let us see what Fayol’s principles means in the contemporary business situations 
especially service based and high tech economies like USA. Carl A. Rodrigues of 
Mont Clair State University, Upper Montclair, New Jersey, USA has come out with 
the following conclusions in his paper “Fayol’s 14 Principles of Management. Then 
and Now- A Framework For Managing Today’s Organisations Effectively” published 
in Journal “Management Decision” 39/10(2001) PP 880-889.

Name of Principle THEN NOW
1. Division of Work Specialisation in workers Generalisation in workers’ 

Job design Job design
2. Authority & Managers are empowered Employees are 

Responsibility empowered
3. Discipline Formalised Controls Informal, Peer pressure 

controls
4. Unity of Command Subordinates report to only Subordinates report to 

one boss multiple bosses
5. Unity of Direction Functions have only one Functions have multiple 

plan and one boss plans and multiple bosses
6. Subordination of Employees are committed Organisation is committed 

individual interest to the organisation to the employees and vice 
to common good versa

7. Remuneration of Reasonable Pay reward Performance based reward 
personnel system system

8. Centralisation Trickle down decision Task relevant ad hoc 
making decision making

9. Scalar Chain Hierarchical, formalised Less formalised, flatter 
communication channel communication structure.

10. Order Internal information system Internal information 
for control purposes system for coordination 

purposes.
11. Equity Commitment obtained Commitment obtained 

through kindness through a sense of 
ownership

12. Stability of tenure Train employees and On-going employee 
of personnel encourage them to remain training and development

13. Initiative Managers conceive and Workers conceive and 
implement new ideas implement new ideas

14. Espirit de corps Maintaining high morale Maintaining high morale 
among employees is among employees is 
imperative desirable.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   61 24-09-2019   12:05:05 PM



62 Business Studies

 (xiii)Initative: Workers should be From the foregoing discussion it 
encouraged to develop and carry is clear that Fayol’s 14 principles of 
out their plans for improvements management are widely applicable to 
according to Fayol. Initiative managerial problems and have cast 
means taking the first step with a profound impact on management 
self-motivation. It is thinking thinking today. But with the change of 
out and executing the plan. It is environment in which business is done, 
one of the traits of an intelligent the interpretation of these principles 
person. Initiative should be has changed. For example, authority 
encouraged. But it does not mean and responsibility meant empowering 
going against the established of managers but now it means 
practices of the company for empowerment of employees because 
the sake of being different. A of flat organisational structures that 
good company should have an are gaining ground. We are now in a 
employee suggestion system position to understand the current 
whereby initiative/suggestions connotations of Fayol’s principles 
which result in substantial discussed in the accompanying box.
cost/time reduction should be 
rewarded. Fayol Versus Taylor — 

 (xiv) Esprit De Corps: Management a Comparison
should promote a team spirit 
of unity and harmony among We are now in a position to compare 
employees, according to Fayol. the contributions of both Fayol and 
Management should promote Taylor. Both of them have contributed 
teamwork especially in large immensely to the knowledge of 
organisations because otherwise management, which has formed a 
objectives would be difficult to basis for further practice by managers. 
realise. It will also result in a It must be pointed out that their 
loss of coordination. A manager contributions are complementary 
should replace ‘I’ with ‘We’ in all to each other. We can make out the 
his conversations with workers following points of difference between 
to foster team spirit. This will their contributions.
give rise to a spirit of mutual You may also like to have some 
trust and belongingness among knowledge of contributions of 
team members. It will also Indians to the growth of management 
minimise the need for using knowledge which can be seen in the 
penalties. accompanying box item.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   62 05-11-2019   3:36:01 PM



Principles of Management 63

Sl. No. Basis of difference Henri Fayol F. W. Taylor

Top level of Shop floor level of a 
1. Perspective

management factory

Did not feel that 
it is important as 
under functional 

2. Unity of Command Staunch Proponent
foremanship a worker 
received orders from 
eight specialists.

Applicable Applicable to 
3. Applicability

universally specialised situations

Observations and 
4. Basis of formation Personal experience

experimentation

Improving overall 
5. Focus Increasing Productivity

administration

6. Personality Practitioner Scientist

General Theory of 
7. Expression Scientific Management

Administration

Key Terms
Functional Foremanship  Standardisation of Work
Time Study  Motion Study  Fatigue Study  Method Study
Differential Piece Wage System  Mental Revolution
Unity of Command  Unity of Direction
Scalar Chain Gang Plank   Espirit De Corps

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   63 24-09-2019   12:05:06 PM



64 Business Studies

Summary
Meaning
Principles of management are general guidelines, which can be 
used for conduct in work places under certain situations. They help 
managers to take and implement decisions.
Nature
The nature of management principles can be discussed under the 
heads- formed by practice; general guidelines; universal; flexible; 
behavioural; contingent; and cause and effect relationship 
Significance
Proper understanding of significance of management principles is 
essential to make sound decisions by managers. The significance 
can be discussed under the following heads- Increase in efficiency; 
Optimum utilisation of resources; Scientific decision making; 
Adaptation to changing environment; Fulfilling social responsibilities; 
Proper research and development; Training managers; and Effective 
administration.
Scientific Management
Taylor’s principles of scientific management are — Science, not the 
rule of thumb; Harmony not discord; Cooperation not individualism; 
Maximum not restricted output; Development of each person to her/
his greatest efficiency and prosperity. The techniques of scientific 
management as per Taylor were — Functional foremanship; 
Standardisation and simplification of work; Fatigue Study; Method 
Study; Time Study; Motion Study; and Differential Wage System. We 
can also point out differences between the contributions of Taylor 
and Fayol but essentially they were complementary in nature.
Fayol’s Principles of Management
According to Fayol, the functions of management are to plan, to 
organise, to command, to coordinate and to control. The activities 
of an industrial undertaking could be divided into; Technical; 
Commercial; Financial; Security; Accounting and Managerial. He 
also suggested that managers should have the following qualities- 
Physical; Moral; Education; Knowledge; and Experience. Fayol 
listed 14 principles of management — Division of work; Authority 
and responsibility; Discipline; Unity of command; Unity of 
direction; Subordination of individual interest to general interest; 
Remuneration of Personnel; Centralisation and decentralisation; 
Scalar Chain; Order; Equity; Stability in the tenure of Personnel; 
Initiative; and Espirit De corps.
We can also point out differences between the contributions of Taylor 
and Fayol but essentially they were complementary in nature.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   64 24-09-2019   12:05:06 PM



Principles of Management 65

Exercises
Very Short Answer Type:

 1. What makes principles of management flexible?
 2. State the main objective of time study.
 3. Name the principle that is an extension of the ‘harmony, not 

discord’.
 4. State any two causes of fatigue that may create hindrance in 

the employee’s performance.
 5. SanakLal and Gagan started their career in Wales Limited 

(a printing press) after going through a rigorous recruitment 
process. Since they had no prior work experience, the firm 
decided to give them one year to prove themselves. Name the 
principle of management followed by Wales Limited.

 6. Which technique is used by Taylor for distinguishing efficient 
and inefficient workers?

Short Answer Type:
 1. How is the Principle of ‘Unity of Command’ useful to 

management? Explain briefly.
 2. Define scientific management. State any three of its 

principles.
 3. If an organisation does not provide the right place for physical 

and human resources in an organisation, which principle is 
violated? What are the consequences of it?

 4. Explain any four points regarding significance of principles 
of management.

 5. Explain the principle of ‘Scalar Chain’ and gang plank.
 6. A production manager at top level in a reputed corporate, 

Mr. Rathore holds the responsibility for ordering raw 
material for the firm. While deciding on the supplier for the 
financial year 2017-18, he gave the order to his cousin at 
a higher price per unit instead of the firm’s usual supplier 
who was willing to lower the rates for the order. Which 
principle of management was violated by Mr. Rathore? What 
are the positive impacts of following the above identified 
principle?

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   65 24-09-2019   12:05:06 PM



66 Business Studies

 Long Answer Type/ Essay Type:
 1. Explain the Principles of Scientific management given by 

Taylor.
 2. Explain the following Principles of management given by 

Fayol with examples:
  a. Unity of direction
  b. Equity
  c. Espirit de corps
  d. Order
  e. Centralisation and decentralisation
  f. Initiative
 2. Explain the technique of ‘Functional Foremanship’ and the 

concept of ‘Mental Revolution’ as enunciated by Taylor.
 3. Discuss the following techniques of Scientific Work Study:
  a. Time Study
  b. Motion Study
  c. Fatigue Study
  d. Method Study
  e. Simplification and standardisation of work
 4. Discuss the differences between the contributions of Taylor 

and Fayol.
 5. Discuss the relevance of Taylor and Fayol’s contribution in 

the contemporary business environment.
 6. ‘Bhasin’ limited was engaged in the business of food 

processing and selling its products under a popular brand. 
Lately the business was expanding due to good quality 
and reasonable prices. Also with more people working the 
market for processed food was increasing. New players were 
also coming to cash in on the new trend. In order to keep 
its market share in the short run the company directed its 
existing workforce to work overtime. But this resulted in many 
problems. Due to increased pressure of work the efficiency 
of the workers declined. Sometimes the subordinates had 
to work for more than one superior resulting in declining 
efficiency. The divisions that were previously working on one 
product were also made to work on two or more products. 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   66 28-10-2019   4:46:26 PM



Principles of Management 67

This resulted in a lot of overlapping and wastage. The workers 
were becoming indisciplined. The spirit of teamwork, which 
had characterized the company, previously was beginning 
to wane. Workers were feeling cheated and initiative was 
declining. The quality of the products was beginning to 
decline and market share was on the verge of decrease.
Actually the company had implemented changes without 
creating the required infrastructure.
a. Identify the Principles of Management (out of 14 given by 

Henry Fayol) that were being violated by the company.
b. Explain these principles in brief.
c. What steps should the company management take in 

relation to the above principles to restore the company 
to its past glory?

 7. (Further information related to the above question 6) The 
management of company Bhasin Limited now realised 
its folly. In order to rectify the situation it appointed a 
management consultant -Mukti Consultants - to recommend 
a restructure plan to bring the company back on the rails. 
Mukti Consultants undertook a study of the production 
process at the plant of the company Bhasin Limited and 
recommended the following changes —
• The company should introduce scientific management 

with regard to production.
• Production Planning including routing, scheduling, 

dispatching and feedback should be implemented.
• In order to separate planning from operational 

management ’Functional foremanship’ should be 
introduced.

• ‘Work study’ should be undertaken to optimise the use 
of resources.

• ‘Standardisation’ of all activities should be implemented 
to increase efficiency and accountability.

• To motivate the workers ‘Differential Piece Rate System’ 
should be implemented.

  (The above changes should be introduced apart from the 
steps recommended as an answer to Part c - case problem 
6 above.)

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   67 24-09-2019   12:05:06 PM



68 Business Studies

  It was expected that the changes will bring about a radical 
transformation in the working of the company and it will 
regain its pristine glory.
a. Do you think that introduction of scientific management 

as recommended by M consultants will result in intended 
outcome?

b. What precautions should the company undertake to 
implement the changes?

c. Give your answer with regard to each technique 
separately as enunciated in points 1 through 6 in the 
case problem.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_02.indd   68 24-09-2019   12:05:06 PM