DIRECTING 7
CHAPTER

Grassroot Leadership - Ford Motor Co.
Ford has always attracted and nurtured LEARN ING  OBJECT IVES
capable managers and technicians, but it After studying  this chapter, you 
has failed to do the same for change agents should be able to:
and leaders. So, as part of the automaker’s 

n Explain the concept of directing 
cultural overhaul, Ford is embarking on a and its importance in business 
sweeping attempt to mass-manufacture 
leaders. It wants to build an army of “warrior- organisations;
entrepreneurs” — people who have the n Understand the principles guiding 
courage and skills to topple old ideas, and directing process;
who believe in change passionately enough n Explain the meaning of supervision 
to make it happen. and its importance;

Ford Motor Company announced key 
changes to its senior management team as n Explain the meaning of motivation 
it continues to strengthen its automotive and its importance in business 
business, improve the company’s operational management;
fitness, and accelerate a strategic shift to n Understand and explain Maslow’s 
capitalize on emerging opportunities. In theory of hierarchy of needs and 
announcing the leadership changes, Ford its application to motivation of 
President and CEO Jim Hackett said Form employees in an organisation;
is “very fortunate to have an experienced n Explain the financial and non-
and committed executive team in place to financial incentives through which 
significantly strengthen their business while managers motivate their employees;
building towards their vision of becoming 
the world’s most trusted mobility company. n Explain the concept of leadership 
Their objective is to lead business to new and its importance in management;
levels of operational fitness, product and n Describe the qualities of a good 
brand excellence and profitability. leader;

Ford views grassroot leadership as the best 
n Explain about formal and 

vehicle for creating a successful business. informal communications in the 
Source: http://media.ford.com/ organisations; and
content/fordmedia/fna/us/en/news/ n Identify various barriers to effective 
2018/02/22/company-news.html communications and measures to 

overcome these barriers in the 
organisations.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   169 08-08-2022   10:35:54



170 Business Studies

IntroductIon performed by every manager. Directing 
The above case reveals how important is a managerial process which 
it is to instill leadership qualities in takes place throughout the life of an 
all managers. Business organisations organisation.
have always given due importance The main characteristics of 
to its managers who are capable of directing are discussed below:
leading others. A manager needs to  (i) Directing initiates action: Directing 
use various ways to lead, motivate is a key managerial function. A 
and inspire the subordinates and to manager has to perform this 
communicate with them suitably. function along with planning, 
These ways, discussed in the present organising, staffing and controlling 
chapter, are collectively called the while discharging his duties in 
directing function of management. the organisation. While other 

functions prepare a setting for 
MeanIng action, directing initiates action 
In the ordinary sense, directing in the organisation.
means giving instructions and guiding  (ii) Directing takes place at every level 
people in doing work. In our daily life, of management: Every manager, 
we come across many situations like from top executive to supervisor 
a hotel owner directing his employees performs the function of directing. 
to complete certain activities for The directing takes place wherever 
organising a function, a teacher superior – subordinate relations 
directing his student to complete an exist.
assignment, a film director directing  (iii) Directing is a continuous process: 
the artists about how they should act Directing is a continuous activity. 
in the film etc. In all these situations, It takes place throughout the life 
we can observe that directing is done to of the organisation irrespective 
achieve some predetermined objective. of people occupying managerial 

In the context of management of positions. We can observe that in 
an organisation, directing refers to organisations like Infosys, Tata, 
the process of instructing, guiding, BHEL, HLL and the managers may 
counselling, motivating and leading change but the directing process 
people in the organisation to achieve continues because without direction 
its objectives. the organisational activities can 

You can observe here that directing not continue further.
is not a mere issue of communication  (iv) Directing flows from top to bottom: 
but encompasses many elements like Directing is first initiated at top 
supervision, motivation and leadership. level and flows to the bottom 
It is one of the key managerial functions through organisational hierarchy. 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   170 08-08-2022   10:35:54



Directing 171

It means that every manager can a manager with good leadership 
direct his immediate subordinate abilities will be in a position to 
and take instructions from his convince the employees working 
immediate boss. under him that individual efforts 

and team effort will lead to 
IMportance of dIrectIng achievement of organisational 
The importance of directing can be goals.
understood by the fact that every  (iii) Directing guides employees to 
action in the organisation is initiated fully realise their potential and 
through directing only. Directing capabilities by motivating and 
guides towards achievement of providing effective leadership. A 
common objectives. Through good leader can always identify 
directing, managers not only tell the the potential of his employees 
people in the organisation as to what and motivate them to extract 
they should do, when they should work up to their full potential.
do and how they should do but  (iv) Directing facilitates introduction 
also see that their instructions are of needed changes in the organi-
implemented in proper perspective. sation. Generally, people have 
Very often, this becomes an important a tendency to resist changes 
factor in the efficient and effective in the organisation. Effective 
functioning of the organisation. directing through motivation, 
The points which emphasise the communication and leadership 
importance of directing are presented helps to reduce such resistance 
as follows: and develop required cooperation 
 (i) Directing helps to initiate action by in introducing changes in the 

people in the organisation towards organisation. For example, if 
attainment of desired objectives. a manager wants to introduce 
For example, if a supervisor guides new system of accounting, 
his subordinates and clarifies there may be initial resistance 
their doubts in performing a task, from accounting staff. But, if 
it will help the worker to achieve manager explains the purpose, 
work targets given to him. provides training and motivates 

 (ii) Directing integrates employees- with additional rewards, the 
efforts in the organisation in such employees may accept change 
a way that every individual effort and cooperate with manager.
contributes to the organisational  (v) Effective directing helps to 
performance. Thus, it ensures bring stability and balance in 
that the individuals work for the organisation since it fosters 
organisational goals. For example, cooperation and commitment 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   171 08-08-2022   10:35:54



172 Business Studies

among the people and helps to benefits to fulfill his personal 
achieve balance among various needs. The organisation may 
groups, activities and the expect employees to improve 
departments. productivity to achieve expected 

profits. But, good directing should 
prIncIples of dIrectIng provide harmony by convincing 
Providing good and effective directing that employee rewards and work 
is a challenging task as it involves efficiency are complimentary to 
many complexities. A manager has each other.
to deal with people with diverse  (iii) Unity of Command: This principle 
background, and expectations. This insists that a person in the 
comp licates the directing process. organisation should receive 
Certain guiding principles of directing instructions from one superior 
may help in directing process. These only. If instructions are received 
principles are briefly explained below: from more than one, it creates 
 (i) Maximum individual contribution: confusion, conflict and disorder 

This principle emphasises that in the organisation. Adherence 
directing techniques must help to this principle ensures effective 
every individual in the organisation direction.
to contribute to his maximum  (iv) Appropriateness of direction tech­
potential for achievement of nique: According to this principle, 
organisational objectives. It should appropriate motivational and 
bring out untappted energies of leadership technique should be 
employees for the efficiency of used while directing the people 
organisation. For example, a good based on subordinate needs, 
motivation plan with suitable capabilities, attitudes and other 
monetary and non-monetary situational variables. For example, 
rewards can motivate an employee for some people money can act as 
to contribute his maximum efforts powerful motivator while for others 
for the organisation as he or she promotion may act as effective 
may feel that their efforts will bring motivator.
them suitable rewards.  (v) Managerial communication: Effe-

 (ii) Harmony of objectives: Very often, ctive managerial communication 
we find that individual objectives of across all the levels in the 
employees and the organisational organisation makes direction 
objectives as understood are effective. Directing should convey 
conflicting to each other. For clear instructions to create total 
example, an employee may expect understanding to subordinates. 
attractive salary and monetary Through proper feedback, the 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   172 08-08-2022   10:35:54



Directing 173

managers should ensure that the profits to the managers for their 
subordinate understands his contribution to inhance profits of the 
instructions clearly. company, and (iv) A manager inspires 

 (vi) Use of informal organisation: A his/her employees by playing a lead 
manager should realise that role in performing a work.
informal groups or organisations All these examples and many 
exist within every formal other activities related to directing 
organisation. He should spot and may broadly be grouped into four 
make use of such organisations categories which are the elements of 
for effective directing. directing. These are:

 (vii) Leadership: While directing the  (i) Supervision
subordinates, managers should  (ii) Motivation
exercise good leadership as it  (iii) Leadership
can influence the subordinates  (iv) Communication
positively without causing To know more about directing, these 
dissatisfaction among them. elements are discussed in detail.

 (viii)Follow through: Mere giving of 
an order is not sufficient. supervIsIon
Managers should follow it up by The term supervision can be 
reviewing continuously whether understood in two ways. Firstly, it 
orders are being implemented can be understood as an element of 
accordingly or any problems are directing and secondly, as a function 
being encountered. If necessary, performed by supervisors in the 
suitable modifications should be organisational hierarchy. 
made in the directions. Supervision being an element of 

directing, every mana ger in the 
eleMents of dIrectIon organisation supervises his/her 
The process of directing involves subordinates. In this sense, supervision 
guiding, coaching, instructing, can be understood as the process of 
motivating, leading the people in an guiding the efforts of employees and 
organisation to achieve organisational other resources to accomplish the desired 
objectives. Consider the following objectives. It means overseeing what 
examples: (i) A supervisor explains is being done by subordinates and 
a worker about operations to be giving instructions to ensure optimum 
carried by him on a lathe machine, utilisation of resources and achievement 
(ii) A mining engineer explains about of work targets.
safety precautions to be followed Secondly, supervision can be 
while working in a coal mine, (iii) A understood as the function to be 
Managing Director declares share in performed by supervisor, a managerial 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   173 08-08-2022   10:35:54



174 Business Studies

position in the organisation relations with workers. A good 
hierarchy at the operative level i.e., supervisor acts as a guide, friend 
immedia tely above the worker. The and philosopher to the workers.
functions and performance of the  (ii) Supervisor acts as a link between 
supervisor are vital to any workers and management. He 
organisation because he is directly conveys management ideas to 
related with workers whereas other the workers on one hand and 
mangers have no direct touch with workers problems to the 
bottom level workers. management on the other. This 

role played by supervisor helps 
Importance of Supervision to avoid misunderstandings and 
The importance of supervision can conflicts between management 
be understood from multiple roles and workers/employees.
performed by a supervisor. These are  (iii) Supervisor plays a key role in 
explained below: maintaining group unity among 
 (i) Supervisor maintains day-to-day workers placed under his control. 

contact and maintains friendly He sorts out internal differences 

Directing a Dissatisfied Manager
Rashmi Joshi had been a district sales manager with Fine Productions for ten years. She was 
recognised by her peers and supervisors as a person who managed department in a good 
way. However, everyone realised that Rashmi was extremely ambitious and was seeking a 
higher-level management position. When one of her sales representatives did a good job, she 
would attempt to take the credit. However, if a problem arose, she thought it was not her 
fault. When the marketing manager retired, Rashmi applied for the position. The company 
decided to do a thorough search because of the responsibility and importance associated 
with the position. When the search was concluded, the decision was made to fill the position 
by a person from outside the company. The consensus of top management was that Rashmi, 
although a good district sales manager might have difficulties in working with her new peer 
groups. They felt that she might displease the other managers if she tried to take credit for 
their work and, as a result, their performance would suffer.

Rashmi was heart-broken. She had wanted that particular job for a long time and had 
dedicated all her energies towards obtaining it. She became very despondent and her work 
deteriorated. The department functioned inspite of her, not because of her. Decisions were 
made slowly if at all and she began to be late with her sales reports. Although her sales staff 
continued to be productive, Rashmi could not take the credit.

When the new marketing manager took over, one of the first major problems that he 
confronted was how to motivate and inspire Rashmi to her former level of performance. He 
recognised that Rashmi had been with the company for a long time but something had to be 
done to motivate her to perform really well.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   174 08-08-2022   10:35:54



Directing 175

and maintains harmony among highly committed and hardworking 
workers. staff or lazy, evasive and superficial 

 (iv) Supervisor ensures performance workers. He or she may wonder what 
of work according to the targets to do with workers not willing to 
set. He takes responsibility for work to their potential. Psychologists 
task achievement and motivates say it is motivation, which stimulates 
his workers effectively. people to take up work voluntarily.

 (v) Supervisor provides good Let us try to understand something 
on-the-job training to the workers about motivation.
and employees. A skilled and Motivation: Motivation means inci-
knowledgeable supervisor can tement or inducement to act or move. In 
build efficient team of workers. the context of an organisation, it means 

 (vi) Supervisory leadership plays the process of making subordinates 
a key role in influencing the to act in a desired manner to achieve 
workers in the organisation. A certain organisational goals. 
supervisor with good leadership While discussing about motivation, 
qualities can build up high we need to understand three inter 
morale among workers. related terms — motive, motivation 

 (vii) A good supervisor analyses and motivators. Let us try to know 
the work performed and gives about these terms.
feedback to the workers. He  (i) Motive: A motive is an inner state 
suggests ways and means of that energises, activates or moves 
developing work skills. and directs behaviour towards 

M goals. Motives arise out of the 
otIvatIon needs of individuals. Realisation of 

The case of Rashmi reveals an a motive causes restlessness in the 
important fact of managerial work; individual which prompts some 
it is not always possible to get the action to reduce such restlessness. 
best of work from employees merely For example, the need for food 
by exercising formal authority. What causes hunger an account of 
makes people to behave the way they which a man searches for food. 
do? Why are some people reluctant to Some such motives are – hunger, 
do the work though they have ability thirst, security, affiliation, need 
to do? What should be done to make for comfort, recognition etc.,
people work effectively?  (ii) Motivation: Motivation is the 

For answering these questions, process of stimulating people 
a manager should try to develop to action to accomplish desired 
insights into causes of behaviour of goals. Motivation depends upon 
people. A manager may come across satisfying needs of people.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   175 08-08-2022   10:35:54



176 Business Studies

 (iii) Motivators: Motivator is the  (ii) Motivation produces goal 
technique used to motivate directed behaviour. For example, 
people in an organisation. Managers the promotion in the job may 
use diverse motivators like pay, be given to employee with 
bonus, promotion, recognition, the objective of improving his 
praise, responsibility etc., in the performance. If the employee 
organisation to influence people to is interested in promotion, it 
contribute their best. helps to produce a behaviour to 

Some of the definitions to explain improve performance.
the concept of motivation are given in  (iii) Motivation can be either positive 
the above box. or negative. Positive motivation 
Features of Motivation: The ana- provides positive rewards like 
lysis of various definitions and increase in pay, promotion, 
viewpoints on motivation reveals the recognition etc., Negative moti-
following features of motivation: vation uses negative means like 
 (i) Motivation is an internal feeling. punishment, stopping increments, 

The urge, drives, desires, aspi- threatening etc. which also may 
rations, striving or needs of human induce a person to act in the 
being, which are internal, influence desired way.
human behaviour. For example,  (iv) Motivation is a complex process as 
people may have the urge or the individuals are heterogeneous 
desire for possessing a motorbike, in their expectations, perceptions 
comfortable house, reputation and reactions. Any type of 
in the society. These urges are motivation may not have uniform 
internal to an individual. effect on all the members.

Definitions on Motivation
Motivation means a process of stimulating people to action to accomplish desired goals 

William G. Scout
Motivation refers to the way in which urges, drives, desires, aspirations, strivings or needs 
direct, control and explain the behaviour of human beings.

Mc Farland
Motivation is a complex force starting with keeping a person at work in an organisation. 
Motivation is something which moves the person to action and continues him in the course 
of action already initiated.

Dubin
Motivation is a process which begins with a physiological or psychological need or deficiency 
which triggers behaviour or a drive that is aimed at a goal or incentive.

Fred Luthans

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   176 08-08-2022   10:35:54



Directing 177

Motivation Process: Motivation walking for 2 kms, he could find a 
process is based on human needs. A hotel where roti and dal was available 
simple model to explain motivation for ` 10. Since he had only ` 15 in 
process is presented below. his pocket, he paid ` 10 and had a 

The following example explains satisfying meal. After taking a meal, 
the process of satisfaction of human he felt that he had regained energy.
needs. An unsatisfied need of an individual 

Ramu is very hungry since he did creates tension which stimulates his 
not have breakfast in the morning. or her drives. These drives generate 
By1.00 P.M., he became restless and a search behaviour to satisfy such 
started walking on the road in search need. If such need is satisfied, the 
of a hotel for snacks or meals. After individual is relieved of tension.

Motivating Employees in Tata Steel 
In Tata Steel several initiatives have been taken to further improve the motivation levels 
and participation in the decision making process of the officers, greater impetus to training 
through a formalised system of a personal development programme, talent review and job 
rotation systems, compensation linked to the performance management system, formal 
rewards and recognition systems, knowledge management systems linked with appraisals, 
leadership opportunities in quality circles, continuous improvement and value engineering 
programmes and an extremely transparent and credible multi-path communication system 
to address queries and concerns of all employees through various dialogues both formal and 
online, with such tools as video conferencing, ‘MD Online’, special dialogues with senior 
management, meetings, conferences and seminars. These initiatives have helped to build a 
homogeneous and focused team in Tata Steel, increasing motivation and binding to the vision 
of the company and spurred employees to deliver targets on a participatory management 
basis leading to ownership of processes.

Tata Steel is a company that actively promotes freedom to work, freedom to innovate 
and even the freedom to fail. It is a nimble, fast, modern and forward-looking company on 
a strong growth path. The company has undergone a revolutionary change in terms of its 
production facilities and the technology in the manufacturing process. These changes have 
resulted in creating greater opportunities for taking up newer challenges for young recruits 
work and for performance based on IT enabled systems and high levels of automation. 
These have led to making the company one of the lowest cost producers of steel and the 
only Indian company to be recognised by the World Steel Dynamics as one of the top most 
‘World Class’ steel makers. Tata Steel hopes not only to consolidate but better its leadership 
by robust leadership development systems that have seen the company create many CEOs 
for other companies. 

http://www.tata.com/tata_steel/releases/20030829.htm

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   177 08-08-2022   10:35:54



178 Business Studies

Unsatisfied Need as well as the organisation. 
Since proper motivation satisfies 
the needs of employees, they in 

Tension turn devote all their energies 
for optimum performance in 
their work. A satisfied employee 

Drives
can always turnout expected 
performance. Good motivation in 

Search  the organisation helps to achieve 
Behaviour higher levels of performance as 

motivated employees contribute 
Satisfied their maximum efforts for 

Need organisational goals.
 (ii) Motivation helps to change 

Reduction nega tive or indifferent attitudes 
of Tension of employee to positive attitudes 

so as to achieve organisational 
Importance of Motivation: In goals. For example, a worker 
the example of Tata Steel you have may have indifferent or negative 
seen how the direction, motivation attitude towards his work, if 
and effective leadership has taken he is not rewarded properly. 
the company forward. Even commu- If suitable rewards are given 
nication systems in the company and supervisor gives positive 
have encouraged employees to encouragement and praise for 
achieve targets. the good work done, the worker 

Motivation is considered important may slowly develop positive 
because it helps to identify and attitude towards the work.
satisfy the needs of human resources  (iii) Motivation helps to reduce 
in the organisation and thereby helps employee turnover and thereby 
in improving their performance. saves the cost of new recruitment 
It is the reason why every major and training. The main reason for 
organisation develops various kinds high rate of employee turnover is 
of motivational programmes and lack of motivation. If managers 
spends crores of rupees on these identify motivational needs of 
programmes. The importance of moti- employees and provide suitable 
vation can be pointed out by the incentives, employees may not 
following benefits: think of leaving the organisation. 
 (i) Motivation helps to improve High rate of turnover compels 

performance levels of employees management to go for new 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   178 08-08-2022   10:35:54



Directing 179

recruitment and training which these, Maslow’s Need Hierarchy 
involve additional investment of Theory is considered fundamental to 
money, time and effort. Motivation understanding of motivation. Let us 
helps to save such costs. It also examine it in detail.
helps to retain talented people in Abraham Maslow, a well-known 
the organisation. psychologist in a classic paper published 

 (iv) Motivation helps to reduce abse- in 1943, outlined the elements of an 
nteeism in the organisation. overall theory of motivation.
Some important reasons for His theory was based on human 
absenteeism are–bad working needs. He felt that within every human 
conditions, inadequate rewards, being, there exists a hierarchy of five 
lack of recognition, poor relations needs. These are:
with supervisors and colleagues  (i) Basic Physiological Needs: These 
etc. Through sound motivational needs are most basic in the 
system, all these deficiencies hierarchy and corresponds to 
can be covered. If motivation primary needs. Hunger, thirst, 
is adequately provided, work shelter, sleep and sex are some 
becomes a source of pleasure examples of these needs. In the 
and workers attend to the work organisational context, basic 
regularly. salary helps to satisfy these 

 (v) Motivation helps managers to needs.
introduce changes smoothly  (ii) Safety/Security Needs: These 
without much resistance from needs provide security and 
people. Normally, for any change protection from physical and 
introduced in the organisation, emotional harm. Examples: job 
there may be resistance for security, stability of income, 
changes. If manager can convince Pension plans etc.,
employees that proposed changes  (iii) Affiliation/Belonging Needs: These 
will bring additional rewards needs refer to affection, sense of 
to employees, they may readily belongingness, acceptance and 
accept the change. friendship.

Maslow’s Need Hierarchy Theory  (iv) Esteem Needs: These include 
of Motivation: Since motivation is factors such as self-respect, 
highly complex, many researchers auto nomy status, recognition 
have studied about motivation from and attention.
several dimensions and developed  (v) Self Actualisation Needs: It is 
some theories. These theories help the highest level of need in the 
to develop understanding about hierarchy. It refers to the drive 
motivation phenomenon. Among to become what one is capable of 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   179 08-08-2022   10:35:54



180 Business Studies

Individual  Organisational  
Example Example

Self fulfillment Achievement of goals

Self 
actualisation 

Status Job title
needs

Esteem 
needs Cordial relations with 

Friendship
Affiliation/ colleagues

Belongingness
needs

Stability of Income Pension plan
Safety/Security 

needs

Hunger Basic Physiological Needs Basic Salary

Maslow’s Need Hierarchy Theory

becoming. These needs include of his propositions are questioned 
growth, self-fulfillment and achi- on his classification of needs and 
evement of goals. hierarchy of needs. But, despite such 

Maslow’s theory is based on the criticism, the theory is still relevant 
following assumptions: because needs, no matter how they 
 (i) People’s behaviour is based on are classified, are important to 

their needs. Satisfaction of such understand the behaviour. It helps 
needs influences their behaviour. managers to realise that need level 

 (ii) People’s needs are in hierarchical of employee should be identified to 
order, starting from basic needs provide motivation to them.
to other higher level needs.

 (iii) A satisfied need can no longer Financial and Non-Financial 
motivate a person; only next higher Incentives 
level need can motivate him. Incentive means all measures which 

 (iv) A person moves to the next are used to motivate people to improve 
higher level of the hierarchy only performance. These incentives may 
when the lower need is satisfied. be broadly classified as financial and 

Maslow’s Theory focuses on the non financial. Let us learn about 
needs as the basis for motivation. these incentives in detail.
This theory is widely recognised Financial Incentives: In the context 
and appreciated. However, some of existing economic system, money 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   180 08-08-2022   10:35:55



Directing 181

Profile of Abraham Maslow (1908 – 1970)
Abraham H. Maslow was born in Brooklyn, New York, in 1908. He studied 
primate behavior at the University of Wisconsin, where he received his 
doctorate in psychology in 1934.

Early in his career, Maslow was drawn to the study of human motivation and 
personality. His work in this area upset strict behaviorists, whose explanations 
of motivation and personality failed to account for what Maslow called the 
whole person. His theory of the hierarchy of needs, which leads to the ‘self-
actualised’ individual, was a strong catalyst for the founding of humanistic 
psychology. Maslow successfully bridged motivation and personality in his 
theories of needs, self-actualising persons, and peak experiences.

Maslow is considered an important figure in contemporary psychology. 
His career was a formidable one. For 14 years he taught at Brooklyn 
College, and then went to Brandeis University as chairman of the Psychology 
Department. In 1968 he was elected president of the American Psychological 
Association. In 1969 he went to the Laughlin Foundation in Menlo Park, 
California. He wrote two important books: Toward a Psychology of Being 
(1968) and Motivation and Personality (1970). Abraham Maslow died of a 
heart attack in 1970.

has become a means to satisfy the system consists of regular 
physical needs of daily life and also of increments in the pay every year 
obtaining social position and power. and enhancement of allowances 
Since, money has the purchasing from time-to-time. In some 
power, it becomes a very important business organisations, pay hike 
incentive for every individual. and increments may be linked to 

Financial incentives refer to performance.
incentives which are in direct  (ii) Productivity linked wage incen­
monetary form or measurable in tives: Several wage incentive 
monetary term and serve to motivate plans aims at linking payment of 
people for better performance. wages to increase in productivity 
These incentives may be provided at individual or group level.
on individual or group basis. The  (iii) Bonus: Bonus is an incentive 
financial incentives generally used offered over and above the wages/
in organisations are listed below: salary to the employees.
 (i) Pay and allowances: For every  (iv) Profit Sharing: Profit sharing 

employee, salary is the basic is meant to provide a share 
monetary incentive. It includes to employees in the profits of 
basic pay, dearness allowance the organisation. This serves 
and other allowances. Salary to motivate the employees to 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   181 08-08-2022   10:35:55



182 Business Studies

improve their performance and Non-financial incentives mainly focus 
contribute to increase in profits. on these needs. Some times, monetary 

 (v) Co­partnership/ Stock option: aspect may be involved in non-financial 
Under these incentive schemes, incentives as well. However, the 
employees are offered company emphasis is to provide psychological 
shares at a set price which is lower and emotional satisfaction rather 
than market price. Sometimes, than money driven satisfaction. For 
management may allot shares in example, if an individual gets promo-
line of various incentives payable tion in the organisation, it satisfies 
in cash. The allotment of shares him psychologically more as he gets a 
creates a feeling of ownership to feeling of elevation, increase in status, 
the employees and makes them increase in authority, challenge in the 
to contribute for the growth job etc., Though promotion involves 
of the organisation. In Infosys payment of extra money, non-monetary 
the scheme of stock option has aspects over-ride monetary aspects.
been implemented as a part of Some of the important non-financial 
managerial compensation. incentives are discussed below:

 (vi) Retirement Benefits: Several  (i) Status: In the organisational 
retirement benefits such as context, status means ranking 
provident fund, pension, and of positions in the organisation. 
gratuity provide financial The authority, responsibility, 
security to employees after their rewards, recognition, perquisites 
retirement. This acts as an and prestige of job indicate 
incentive when they are in service the status given to a person 
in the organisation. holding a managerial position. 

 (vii) Perquisites: In many companies Psychological, social and esteem 
perquisites and fringe benefits needs of an individual are satisfied 
are offered such as car allowance, by status given to their job.
housing, medical aid, and  (ii) Organisational Climate: Organi-
education to the children, etc., sational climate indicates the 
over and above the salary. characteristics which describe 
These measures help to provide an organisation and distinguish 
motivation to the employees/ one organisation from the other. 
managers. These characteristics influence 

Non-Financial Incentives: All the the behaviour of individuals in 
needs of individuals are not satisfied the organisation. Some of these 
by money alone. Psychological, social characteristics are–individual 
and emotional factors also play autonomy, reward orientation, 
important role in providing motivation. consideration to employees, 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   182 08-08-2022   10:35:55



Directing 183

risk-tasking, etc., If managers appreciation is given to the work 
take positive measures regarding performed by employees, they 
these aspects, it helps to develop feel motivated to perform/work 
better organisational climate. at higher level. Some examples of 

 (iii) Career Advancement Opportunity: employee recognition are:
Every individual wants to n Congratulating the employee 
grow to the higher level in for good performance.
the organisation. Managers n Displaying on the notice board 
should provide opportunity to or in the company news letter 
employees to improve their skills about the achievement of 
and be promoted to the higher employee.
level jobs. Appropriate skill n Installing award or certificate 
development programmes, and for best performance.
sound promotion policy will help n Distributing mementos, com-
employees to achieve promotions. plimentaries like T -shirts 
Promotion works as a tonic and in recognition of employee 
encourages employees to exhibit services.
improved performance. n Rewarding an employee for 

 (iv) Job Enrichment: Job enrichment giving valuable suggestions.
is concerned with designing jobs  (vi) Job security: Employees want 
that include greater variety of their job to be secure. They want 
work content, require higher certain stability about future 
level of knowledge and skill; income and work so that they 
give workers more autonomy do not feel worried on these 
and responsibility; and provide aspects and work with greater 
the opportunity for personal zeal. In India, this aspect is 
growth and a meaningful work more important considering the 
experience. If jobs are enriched inadequate job opportunities and 
and made interesting, the job itself too many aspirants for these. 
becomes a source of motivation to However, there is one negative 
the individual. aspect of job security. When 

 (v) Employee Recognition programmes: people feel that they are not 
Most people have a need for likely to lose their jobs, they may 
evaluation of their work and due become complacent.
recognition. They feel that what  (vii) Employee participation: It means 
they do should be recognised by involving employees in decision 
others concerned. Recognition making of the issues related to 
means acknowledgment with a them. In many companies, these 
show of appreciation. When such programmes are in practice in 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   183 08-08-2022   10:35:55



184 Business Studies

the form of joint management success without such great leaders. 
committees, work committees, The leaders always play a key role 
canteen committees etc., for the success and excellence of any 

 (viii)Employee Empowerment: Empo- organisation.
werment means giving more Let us understand the concept 
autonomy and powers to of leadership, its importance and 
subordinates. Empowerment qualities of good leaders. Leadership 
makes people feel that their is the process of influencing the 
jobs are important. This feeling behaviour of people by making 
contributes positively to the use them strive voluntarily towards 
of skills and talents in the job achievement of organisational goals. 
performance. Leadership indicates the ability 

of an individual to maintain good 
leadershIp interpersonal relations with followers 
Whenever we hear the success and motivate them to contribute for 
stories of any organisation, we are achieving organisational objectives.
immediately reminded of their leaders. 
Can you imagine Mircrosoft without Features of leadership
Bill Gates, Reliance Industries without An examination of the above defi-
Ambanis, Infosys without Narayana nition reveals the following important 
Murthy, Tata without J.R.D. Tata features of leadership:
or Wipro without Azim Premji. You  (i) Leadership indicates ability of an 
would say it is not possible to achieve individual to influence others.

Definitions of Leadership
Leadership is the activity of influencing people to strive willingly for group objectives.

George Terry
Leadership is the art or process of influencing people so that they will strive willingly and 
enthusiastically towards the achievement of group goals.

Harold Koontz and Heinz Weihrich
Leadership is a set of interpersonal behaviours designed to influence employees to cooperate 
in the achievement of objectives.

Glueck
Leadership is both a process and property. The process of leadership is the use of non-
coercive influence to direct and coordinate the activities of the members of an organised 
group towards the accomplishment of group objectivities. As a property, leadership is the set 
of qualities or characteristics attributed to those who are perceived to successfully employ 
such influence.

Gay and Strake

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   184 08-08-2022   10:35:55



Directing 185

 (ii) Leadership tries to bring change related factors like – their skills, 
in the behaviour of others. knowledge, commitment, willingness 

 (iii) Leadership indicates interperso- to cooperate, team spirit etc., make 
nal relations between leaders and a person an effective leader. It is said 
followers. that followers make a person, a good 

 (iv) Leadership is exercised to achieve leader by acceptance of leadership. 
common goals of the organisation. Therefore, it is to be recognised that 

 (v) Leadership is a continuous both leader and follower play key role 
in leadership process.

process.
The term leader emerges from Importance of Leadership: 

Leadership is a key factor in making 
leadership. An individual possessing any organisation successful. History 
attributes of leadership is known reveals that, many times, difference 
as leader. While discussing about between success and failure of an 
leadership, it is important to under- organisation is leadership. It is aptly 
stand leader–follower relat ionship. mentioned by Stephen Covey, a 
Many times, the success of an famous management consultant, that 
organisation is attributed to the managers are important but leaders 
leader, but due credit is not given are vital for lasting organisational 
to the followers. Many followers success. A leader not only commits 

Effective leadership is getting work 
done, tasks completed on time and goals 
achieved at minimum cost

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   185 08-08-2022   10:35:57



186 Business Studies

his followers to organisational goals  (v) Leader provides training to their 
but also pools needed resources, subordinates. A good leader 
guides and motivates subordinates to always builds up his successor 
reach the goals. and helps in smooth succession 

The importance of leadership can process.
be discussed from the following However, we should remember that 
benefits to the organisation: all good leaders may not necessarily 
 (i) Leadership influences the posses all the qualities of a good 

behaviour of people and makes leader. In fact, it is not possible for 
them to positively contribute any individual to have all the qualities. 
their energies for the benefit of But an understanding about these 
the organisation. Good leaders qualities help the managers to acquire 
always produce goods results them through training and conscious 
through their followers. efforts.

 (ii) A leader maintains personal Leadership Style
relations and helps followers There are many theories of leadership 
in fulfilling their needs. He behaviour and styles. Research 
provides needed confidence, studies have revealed certain traits 
support and encouragement and and qualities which a leader might 
thereby creates congenial work possess. However, these are not 
environment. conclusive since many people may 

 (iii) Leader plays a key role in possess these qualities but may not 
introducing required changes in be leaders. 
the organisation. He persuades, There are several bases for classifying 
clarifies and inspires people to leadership styles. The most popular 
accept changes whole-heartedly. classification of leadership styles is 
Thus, he overcomes the problem based on the use of authority. Depending 
of resistance to change and on the use of authority, there are three 
introduces it with minimum basic styles of leadership:
discontentment.  (i) Autocratic (ii) Democratic, and

 (iv) A leader handles conflicts  (iii) Laissez-faire
effectively and does not allow  (i) Autocratic or Authoritarian leader 
adverse effects resulting from the   An autocratic leader gives orders 
conflicts. A good leader always and expects his subordinates to 
allows his followers to ventilate obey those orders.  If a manager 
their feelings and disagreement is following this style, then 
but persuades them by giving communication is only one-way 
suitable clarifications. with the subordinate only acting 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   186 08-08-2022   10:35:57



Directing 187

according to the command given  (iii) Laissez faire or Free-rein leader 
by the manager.   Such a leader does not believe in the 

  This leader is dogmatic, i.e., use of power unless it is absolutely 
does not change or wish to be essential. The followers are given 
contradicted. His following is a high degree of independence to 
based on the assumption that formulate their own objectives and 
reward or punishment both can be ways to achieve them. The group 
given depending upon the result. members work on their own tasks 
This leadership style is effective resolving issues themselves.  The 
in getting productivity in many manager is there only to support 
situations like in a factory where them and supply them the 
the supervisor is responsible for required information to complete 
production on time and has to the task assigned. At the same 
ensure labour productivity. Quick time, the subordinate assumes 
decision-making is also facilitated. responsibility for the work to be 

   But there are variations also, performed. 
they may listen to everyone’s Depending upon the situation 
opinion, consider subordinates a leader may choose to exercise a 
ideas and concerns but the combination of these styles when 
decision will be their own. required. Even a laissez faire leader 

 (ii) Democratic or Participative would have certain rules to be followed 
leader while doing work and a democratic 

  A democratic leader will develop leader may have to take his own 
action plans and makes decision in an emergency situation.
decisions in consultation 
with his subordinates. He will coMMunIcatIon 
encourage them to participate Communication plays key role in 
in decision-making. This kind of the success of a manager. How 
leadership style is more common much professional knowledge and 
now-a-days, since leaders also intelligence a manager possesses 
recognise that people perform becomes immaterial if he is not 
best if they have set their own able to communicate effectively 
objectives. They also need to with his subordinates and create 
respect the other’s opinion and understanding in them. Directing 
support subordinates to perform abilities of a manager mainly depend 
their duties and accomplish upon his communication skills. That 
organisational objectives. They is why organisation always emphasise 
exercise more control by using on improving communication skills of 
forces within the group.           managers as well as employees.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   187 08-08-2022   10:35:57



188 Business Studies

Definitions of Communication
Communication is the sum of all things one person does when he wants to create understanding 
in the mind of another. It involves systematic and continuous process of telling, listening and 
understanding.

Louis Allen
Communication is transfer of information from the sender to the receiver with the information 
being understood by the receiver.

Harold Koontz and Heniz Weihrich
Communication is a process by which people create and share information with one another 
in order to reach common understanding.

Rogers

Effective Communication 
increases managerial efficiency A close examination of above 

definitions reveals that communication 
is the process of exchange of infor-
mation between two or more persons 
to reach common understanding.

Elements of Communication 
Process
Communication has been defined 
as a process. This process involves 
elements like source, encoding, 
media/channel, receiver, decoding, 

 The word communication has noise and feedback. The process is 
been derived from the Latin word represented in the figure. 
‘communis’ which means ‘common’ The elements involved in commu-
which consequently implies common nication process are explained below:
understanding. Communication is  (i) Sender: Sender means person who 
defined in different ways. Generally, it conveys his thoughts or ideas to 
is understood as a process of exchange the receiver. The sender represents 
of ideas, views, facts, feelings, etc., source of communication.
between or among people to create  (ii) Message: It is the content of ideas, 
common understanding. feelings, suggestions, order, etc., 

Some of the definitions given by intended to be communicated.
management experts are presented  (iii) Encoding: It is the process of 
in the box. converting the message into 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   188 08-08-2022   10:35:59



Directing 189

communication symbols such as may be caused to sender, message 
words, pictures, gestures etc., or receiver. Some examples of 

 (iv) Media: It is the path through which noise are:
encoded message is transmitted (a) Ambiguous symbols that lead 
to receiver. The channel may be in to faulty encoding.
written form, face to face, phone (b) A poor telephone connection. 
call, Internet etc., (c) An inattentive receiver.

 (v) Decoding: It is the process of (d) Faulty decoding (attaching 
converting encoded symbols of wrong meanings to message).
the sender. (e) Prejudices obstructing the poor 

 (vi) Receiver: The person who understanding of message.
receives communication of the (f ) Gestures and postures that 
sender. may distort the message.

 (vii) Feedback: It includes all those Importance of Communication
actions of receiver indicating that Communication is one of the most 
he has received and understood central aspects of managerial 
message of sender. activities. It has been estimated that 

 (viii) Noise: Noise means some a manager spends 90 percent of his 
obstruction or hindrance to time in communicating-reading, 
communication. This hindrance writing, listening, guiding, instructing, 

Encoding Decoding

Sender Message Media Receiver

Noise

Feedback

Communication Process

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   189 08-08-2022   10:35:59



190 Business Studies

approving, reprimanding, etc. Effect- active working unit that achieves 
iveness of a manager depends common objectives. It is only 
significantly on his ability to communication which makes 
communicate effectively with his smooth working of an enterprise 
superiors, subordinates and external possible. Communication is basic 
agencies such as bankers, suppliers, to an organisation’s existence-
union and government. right from its birth through 

An ex-president of American its continuing life. When 
Management Association once communication stops, organised 
observed that number one management activity ceases to exist.
problem today is communication.  (iii) Acts as basis of decision making: 
Bernard has called it the foundation Communication provides needed 
of all group activities. Communication information for decision making. 
serves as the lubricant fostering In its absence, it may not be 
for the smooth operations of the possible for the managers to take 
management process. The importance any meaningful decision. Only 
of communication in management on the basis of communication 
can be judged from the following: of relevant information one can 
 (i) Acts as basis of coordination: take right decision.

Communication acts as basis  (iv) Increases managerial efficiency: 
of coordination. It provides Communication is essential for 
coordination among departments, quick and effective performance 
activities and persons in the of managerial functions. The 
organisation. Such coordination management conveys the goals 
is provided by explaining about and targets, issues instructions, 
organisational goals, the mode allocates jobs and responsibilities 
 of their achievement and inter and looks after the performance 

r of subordinates. Communication 
elationships between different is involved in all these aspects. 

individuals, etc. Thus, communication lubricates 
 (ii) Helps in smooth working of the entire organisation and keeps 

an enterprise: Communication the organisation at work with 
makes possible for the smooth efficiency.
and unrestricted working of the  (v) Promotes cooperation and indust­
enterprise. All organisational rial peace: Efficient operation is the 
interactions depend on comm- aim of all prudent management. It 
unications. The job of a manager may be possible only when there 
is to coordinate the human is industrial peace in the factory 
and physical elements of an and mutual cooperation between 
organisation into an efficient and management and workers. The 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   190 08-08-2022   10:35:59



Directing 191

two way communication promotes tion may take place between a superior 
cooperation and mutual underst- and subordinate, a subordinate and 
anding between the management superior or among same cadre emplo-
and workers. yees or managers. The communications 

 (vi) Establishes effective leadership: may be oral or written but generally 
Communication is the basis of recorded and filed in the office.
leadership. Effective commu- Formal communication may be 
nication helps to influence further classified as – Vertical and 
subordinates. While influencing Horizontal.
people, leader should possess Vertical communication flows 
good communication skills. vertically, i.e., upwards or downwards 

 (vii) Boosts morale and provides through formal channels. Upward 
motivation: An efficient system of communications refer to flow of 
communication enables manage- communication from subordinate 
ment to motivate, influence to superior whereas downward 
and satisfy the subordinates. communication indicates commu-
Good communication assists nication from a superior to 
the workers in their adjustment subordinate. The examples of upward 
with the physical and social communication are – application 
aspect of work. It improves good for grant of leave, submission of 
human relations in industry. progress report, request for grants, etc. 
Communication is the basis of Similarly, the examples of downward 
participative and democratic communication include – sending 
pattern of management. Comm- notice to employees to attend a meeting, 
unication helps to boost morale ordering subordinates to complete an 
of employees and managers. assigned work, passing on guidelines 

framed by top management to the 
forMal and InforMal subordinates, etc.

Horizontal or lateral communication 
coMMuncIatIon takes place between one division and 
Communication taking place within another. For example, a production 
an organisation may be broadly manager may contact marketing 
classified as formal and informal manager to discuss about schedule 
communication. of product delivery, product design, 

Formal Communication quality, etc.
The pattern through which 

Formal communication flows through communication flows within the 
official channels designed in the organisation is generally indicated 
organisation chart. This communica- through communication network. 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   191 08-08-2022   10:35:59



192 Business Studies

Chain Wheel Circular Free Flow Inverted V

Communication Network

Different types of communication  (iv) Free flow: In this network, each 
networks may operate in formal person can communicate with 
organisation. Some of the popular others freely. The flow of commu-
communication networks are nication is fast in this network.
presented and discussed in given  (v) Inverted V: In this network, a 
figure. subordinate is allowed to comm-
 (i) Single chain: This network exists unicate with his immediate 

between a supervisor and his superior as well as his superiors 
subordinates. Since many levels superior. However, in later case, 
exist in an organisation structure, only prescribed communication 
communication flows from every takes place.
superior to his subordinate through 
single chain. Informal Communication

 (ii) Wheel: In wheel network, all Communication that takes place 
subordinates under one superior without following the formal lines of 
communicate through him only communication is said to be informal 
as he acts as a hub of the wheel. communication. Informal system of 
The subordinates are not allowed communication is generally referred to 
to talk among themselves. as the ‘grapevine’ because it spreads 

 (iii) Circular: In circular network, the throughout the organisation with its 
communication moves in a circle. branches going out in all directions 
Each person can communicate in utter disregard to the levels of 
with his adjoining two persons. authority.
In this network, communication The informal communication 
flow is slow. arises out of needs of employees to 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   192 08-08-2022   10:35:59



Directing 193

Gossip Network Probability Network Cluster Network

Grapevine Communication Networks

exchange their views, which cannot should make use of positive aspects 
be done through formal channels. of informal channels and minimise 
Workers chit chating in a canteen negative aspects of this channel 
about the behaviour of the superior, of communication.
discussing about rumours that some Grapevine Network
employees are likely to be transferred Grapevine communication may 
are some examples of informal follow different types of network. 
communications. The grapevine/ In single strand network, each 
informal communication spreads person communicates to the other in 
rapidly and sometimes gets distorted. sequence. In gossip network, 
It is very difficult to detect the source each person communicates with 
of such communication. It also leads all on non-selective basis. In 
to generate rumours which are not probability network, the individual 
authentic. People’s behaviour is affected communicates randomly with other 
by rumours and informal discussions individual. In cluster, the individual 
and sometimes may hamper work communicates with only those 
environment. Sometimes, grapevine people whom he trusts. Of these four 
channels may be helpful as they carry types of networks, cluster is the most 
information rapidly and, therefore, popular in organisations.
may be useful to the manager at times. Barriers to Communication
Informal channels are used by the It is generally observed that 
managers to transmit information so managers face several problems due 
as to know the reactions of his/her to communication breakdowns or 
subordinates. An intelligent manager barriers. These barriers may prevent 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   193 08-08-2022   10:35:59

Single Strand Network



194 Business Studies

a communication or filter part of it 
or carry incorrect meaning due to 
which misunder standings may be 
created. Therefore, it is important for 
a manager to identity such barriers 
and take measures to overcome them.

The barriers to communication in the 
organisations can be broadly grouped 
as: semantic barriers, psychological 
barriers, organisational barriers, and 
personal barriers. These are briefly Communication Grapevine
discussed below:
Semantic barriers: Semantics is consider these three sentences 
the branch of linguistics dealing with where the work ‘value’ is used:
the meaning of words and sentences. (a) What is the value of this ring? 
Semantic barriers are concerned (b) I value our friendship.
with problems and obstructions (c) What is the value of learning 
in the process of encoding and computer skills?

 You will find that the ‘value’ 
decoding of message into words gives different meaning in 
or impressions. Normally, such different contexts. Wrong 
barriers result on account of use of perception leads to comm-
wrong words, faulty translations, unication problems.
different interpretations, etc. These  (iii) Faulty translations: Sometimes 
are discussed below: the communications originally 
 (i) Badly expressed message: Some drafted in one language (e.g., 

times intended meaning may English) need to be translated 
not be conveyed by a manager to the language understandable 
to his subordinates. These to workers (e.g., Hindi). If the 
badly expressed messages may translator is not proficient with 
be an account of inadequate both the languages, mistakes 

may creep in causing different 
vocabulary, usage of wrong meanings to the communication.
words, omission of needed  (iv) Unclarified assumptions: Some 
words, etc. communications may have certain 

 (ii) Symbols with different meanings: assumptions which are subject 
A word may have several mean- to different interpretations. For 
ings. Receiver has to perceive one example, a boss may instruct 
such meaning for the word used his subordinate, “Take care of 
by communicator. For example, our guest”. Boss may mean that 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   194 08-08-2022   10:36:01



Directing 195

subordinate should take care of may be due to pre-conceived 
transport, food, accommodation notions or prejudices against the 
of the guest until he leaves the communication.
place. The subordinate may  (ii) Lack of attention: The pre-
interpret that guest should occupied mind of receiver and the 
be taken to hotel with care. 
Actually, the guest suffers due to resultant non-listening of message 
these unclarified assumptions. acts as a major psychological 

 (v) Technical  jargon: It is usually barrier. For instance, an employee 
found that specialists use technical explains about his problems to 
jargon while explaining to persons the boss who is pre-occupied with 
who are not specialists in the an important file before him. The 
concerned field. Therefore, they boss does not grasp the message 
may not understand the actual and the employee is disappointed. 
meaning of many such words.  (iii) Loss by transmission and poor 

 (vi) Body language and gesture 
decoding: Every movement retention: When communication 
of body communicates some passes through various levels, 
meaning. The body movement successive transmissions of 
and gestures of communicator the message results in loss of, 
matters so much in conveying or transmission of inaccurate 
the message. If there is no information. This is more so in 
match between what is said case of oral communication.
and what is expressed in body   Poor retention is another problem. 
movements, communications 
may be wrongly perceived. Usually people cannot retain 

Psychological barriers: Emotional the information for a long time 
or psychological factors acts as if they are inattentive or not 
barriers to communicators. For interested.
example, a worried person cannot  (iv) Distrust: Distrust between comm-
communicate properly and an angry unicator and communicate 
receiver cannot understand the real acts as a barrier. If the parties 
meaning of message. The state of do not believe each other, they 
mind of both sender and receiver 
of communication reflects in the can not understand each others 
effective communication. Some of message in its original sense.
the psychological barriers are: Organisational barriers: The factors 
 (i) Premature evaluation: Some related to organisation structure, 

times people evaluate the authority relationships, rules and 
meaning of message before the regulations may, sometimes, act as 
sender completes his message. barriers to effective communication. 
Such premature evaluation Some of these barriers are:

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   195 08-08-2022   10:36:01



196 Business Studies

 (i) Organisational policy: If the of these facilities may create 
organisational policy, explicit communication problems.
or implicit, is not supportive to Personal barriers: The personal 
free flow of communication, it factors of both sender and receiver 
may hamper effectiveness of may exert influence on effective 
communications. For example, communication. Some of the 
in an organisation with highly personal barriers of superiors and 
centralised pattern, people may subordinates are mentioned below:
not be encouraged to have free  (i) Fear of challenge to authority: 
communication. If a superior perceives that a 

 (ii) Rules and regulations: Rigid rules particular communication may 
and cumbersome procedures may adversely affect his authority, he 
be a hurdle to communication. or she may withhold or suppress 
Similarly, communications such communication.
through prescribed channel may  (ii) Lack of confidence of superior 
result in delays. on his subordinates: If superiors 

 (iii) Status: Status of superior do not have confidence on 
may create psychological the competency of their 
distance between him and his subordinates, they may not seek 
subordinates. A status conscious their advice or opinions.
manager also may not allow his  (iii) Unwillingness to communicate: 
subordinates to express their Sometimes, subordinates may 
feelings freely. not be prepared to communicate 

 (iv) Complexity in organisation with their superiors, if they 
structure: In an organisation where perceive that it may adversely 
there are number of managerial affect their interests.
levels, communication gets  (iv) Lack of proper incentives: If there 
delayed and distorted as number is no motivation or incentive for 
of filtering points are more. communication, subordinates 

 (v) Organisational facilities: If may not take initiative to 
facilities for smooth, clear and communicate. For example, if 
timely communications are not there is no reward or appreciation 
provided communications may for a good suggestion, the 
be hampered. Facilities like subordinates may not be willing 
frequent meetings, suggestion to offer useful suggestions.
box, complaint box, social and Improving Communication 
cultural gathering, transparency Effectiveness 
in operations, etc., will encourage The barriers to effective  communi-
free flow of communication. Lack cation exists in all organisations to a 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   196 29-08-2022   12:19:20



Directing 197

greater or lesser degree. Organisations are the important aspects 
keen on developing effective communi- of effective communication. 
cation should adopt suitable measures The language used should be 
to overcome the barriers and improve understandable to the receiver 
communication effectiveness. Some and should not offend the 
such measures are indicated below: sentiments of listeners. The 
 (i) Clarify the ideas before message should be stimulating 

communication:  The problem to evoke response from 
to be communicated to the listeners.
subordinates should be clear  (v) Convey things of help and value 
in all its perspective to the to listeners: While conveying 

message to others, it is better to 
executive himself. The entire know the interests and needs of 
problem should be studied in the people with whom you are 
depth, analysed and stated in communicating. If the message 
such a manner that is clearly relates directly or indirectly 
conveyed to subordinates. to such interests and needs it 

 (ii) Communicate according to certainly evokes response from 
the needs of receiver: The level communicatee.
of understanding of receiver  (vi) Ensure proper feedback: The 
should be crystal clear to the communicator may ensure 
communicator. Manager should the success of communication 
adjust his communication by asking questions regarding 
according to the education the message conveyed. The 
and understanding levels of receiver of communication 
subordinates. may also be encouraged to 

 (iii) Consult others before respond to communication. 
communicating: Before The communication process 
actually communicating the may be improved by the 

feedback received to make it 
message, it is better to involve more responsive.
others in developing a plan for  (vii) Communicate for present as well 
communication. Participation as future: Generally, commun-
and involvement of subordinates ication is needed to meet the 
may help to gain ready acceptance existing commitments to maintain 
and willing cooperation of consist ency, the communication 
subordinates. should aim at future goals of the 

 (iv) Be aware of languages, tone and enterprise also.
content of message: The contents  (viii) Follow up communications: There 
of the message, tone, language should be regular follow up and 
used, manner in which the review on the instructions given 
message is to be communicated to subordinates. Such follow 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   197 29-08-2022   12:19:20



198 Business Studies

up measures help in removing and attentive listening solves 
hurdles if any in implementing half of the problems. Managers 
the instructions. should also give indications of 

 (ix) Be a good listener: Manager their interest in listening to their 
should be a good listener. Patient subordinates. 

Key Terms 
Directing  Supervision  Motives  Motivation  Incentives  
Self actualisation  Egoistic needs  Leadership  Trait approach  
Communication  Encoding  Decoding  Feedback
Semanticism  Formal communication  
Informal communication  Profit sharing  Copartnership   
Quality circles  Stock options 

Summary
Directing is a complex managerial function consisting of all the 
activities that are designed to encourage subordinates to work 
effectively. It includes supervision, motivation, communication 
and leading. The principles which guide effective directing may 
be classified as principles related to the purpose of directing and 
principles related to direction process. 
Supervision: It is an element of direction. It can be understood 
as a process as well as the functions performed by supervisor (a 
position at operative level). Supervision is very important as it is 
closely linked to overseeing the work, guiding and ensuring that 
targets are met by workers and employees. 
Motivation: Motivation is the process of stimulating people to action 
to accomplish desired goals of organisation. It is an internal feeling 
of an individual and leads to goal directed behaviour. Motivation 
is mainly based on needs of individuals. It helps individuals and 
groups in the organisation for improved performance. 

Managers offer incentives to employees both financial and 
non financial. Financial incentives are monetary and may be 
in the form of salary, bonus, profit sharing, pension, etc. Non 
financial incentives provide social and psychological satisfaction. 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   198 08-08-2022   10:36:01



Directing 199

These include status, promotion, responsibility, job enrichment, 
job recognition, job security, employee participation, delegation, 
empowerment etc. 
Leadership: Leadership is most important factor in the 
success of an enterprise. It is the process of influencing 
people to strive willingly for group objectives. The qualities of 
a good leader have been researched by many experts. Some 
of the qualities of good leader include–courage, will power, 
judgement, knowledge, integrity, physical energy, faith, moral 
qualities, fairness, vitality, decisiveness, social skills etc. But 
all these qualities cannot be possessed by one individual nor 
always help in their success. 
Communication: Communication refers to process of exchange 
of ideas between or among persons and create understanding. 
Communication process involves the elements of source, encoding, 
channel, receiver, decoding and feedback. In organisations, both 
formal and informal communications simultaneously takes place. 
Formal communications refers to all official communications in 
the form of orders, memos, appeals, notes, circulars, agenda, 
minutes, etc. Apart from formal communications, informal or 
grapevine communications also exist. Informal communications 
are usually in the form of rumours, whispers, etc. They are 
unofficial, spontaneous, unrecorded, spread very fast and usually 
distorted. A manager should learn to manage with informal 
communication also. In most of the organisations, several barriers 
may exist for effective communications. Some of these barriers 
include – semantic barriers, organisational barriers, language 
barriers, transmission barriers, psychological barriers and 
personal barriers. Managers should take appropriate measures 
to overcome these barriers and promote effective communication 
in the organisation. 

Exercises
 Very Short Answer Type

1. What is informal communication?
2. Which style of leadership does not believe in use of power 

unless it is absolutely essential?
3. Which element in the communication process involves 

converting the message into words, symbols, gestures etc.? 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   199 08-08-2022   10:36:01



200 Business Studies

4. The workers always try to show their inability when any new 
work is given to them. They are always unwilling to take up 
any kind of work. Due to sudden rise in demand a firm wants 
to meet excess orders. The supervisor is finding it difficult 
to cope up with the situation. State the element of directing 
that can help the supervisor in handling the problem.

Short Answer Type
1. What are semantic barriers of communication?
2. Explain the process of motivation with the help of a diagram.
3. State the different networks of grapevine communications.
4. Explain any three principles of Directing. 
5. In an organisation, one of the departmental manager is 

inflexible and once he takes a decision, he does not like to 
be contradicted. As a result, employees always feel they are 
under stress and they take least initiative and fear to express 
their opinions and problems before the manager. What is the 
problem in the way authority is being used by the manager?

6. A reputed hostel, GyanPradan provides medical aid and free 
education to children of its employees. Which incentive is 
being highlighted here? State its category and name any two 
more incentives of the same category.

Long Answer Type
1. Discuss Maslow’s Need Hierarchy theory of motivation.
2. What are the common barriers to effective communication? 

Suggest measures to overcome them.
3. Explain different financial and non-financial incentives used 

to motivate employees of a company?
4. In an organisation all the employees take things easy and 

are free to approach anyone for minor queries and problems. 
This has resulted in everyone taking to each other and thus 
resulting in inefficiency in the office. It has also resulted in 
loss of secrecy and confidential information being leaked 
out. What system do you think the manager should adopt to 
improve communication?

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_07.indd   200 08-08-2022   10:36:01