NATURE AND SIGNIFICANCE 
OF MANAGEMENT 1

CHAPTER
Management at Tata Steel
Founded in 1868, by Jamsetji Nusserwanji ,Tata the Tata Group L E A R N I N G 
is a global business conglomerate operating in over 100 countries O B J E C T I V E S
across 5 continents. His strong sense of values and spirit of 
innovation and entrepreneurship are a legacy that continues to After studying this 
guide Tata companies till date. He had four goals in life: setting chapter, you should 
up an iron and steel company, a world-class learning institution, a be able to:
unique hotel and a hydro-electric plant. Only the hotel became a 
reality during his lifetime, with the inauguration of the Taj Mahal n Describe the 
Hotel at Colaba waterfront in Mumbai on 3 December 1903 at characteristics of 
the cost of 11 million (worth 11 billion in 2015 prices). At that management and 
time it was the only hotel in India to have electricity. 

He believed that satisfied workers create satisfied workers and its importance in 
in lieu to this principle he paid all his workers gratuity, provident an organisation;
fund well before it was made mandatory. His management 
skills were clearly evident when minute details were chalked in n Explain the nature 
planning and building the entire city of Jamshedpur. The values of management 
and principles that have governed the business for a century are as an art, science 
enshrined in the Tata Code of Conduct (TCOC).

From an early foray into steel and automobiles, to staying and profession;
abreast of the latest technologies, the Tata Group today has n Explain the 
29 publicly-listed Tata enterprises, which include Tata Steel, 
Tata Motors, Tata Consultancy Services, Tata Power, Tata functions of 
Chemicals, Tata Global Beverages, Tata Teleservices, Titan, Tata management; and
Communications and Indian Hotels. The group has a combined 
market capitalisation of around $103.51bn (2016-17). n Appreciate 

Tata has a strong sense of social responsibility. They balance the nature and 
economic prosperity, environmental responsibility and social importance of  
benefits for the community. In India, they are a partner in progress coordination.
with Odisha, and believe in taking its stakeholders forward in 
its journey of growth. Tata Steel Thailand is one of the first 30 
companies that joined UNICEF in Child Friendly Business in 
“The Children Sustainability Forum” to make a commitment 
in protecting children’s rights. Tata Steel Europe’s Community 
Partnership Programme- ‘Future Generations’, with sub-themes 
of education, environment, health and Well-being works across 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   1 24-09-2019   12:15:10 PM



2 Business Studies

the UK, assisting job and wealth creation by supporting small and 
medium businesses with finance and business premises.

They also play a constructive role in addressing climate change – 
both by reducing carbon footprint, and by creating high performance 
steels that lead to fuel-efficient vehicles and energy-efficient buildings. 
Their Environmental Management Systems meet the ISO 14001 
standards at all of their main manufacturing sites.

Shaped by a lineage of sound and straightforward business 
principles, the Tata Group is built on a foundation of trust and 
transparency. Building such huge enterprises, sustaining and running 
them profitably are possible only through effective and efficient 
management and co-ordination at all levels.  

Source: www.tatasteel.com; Accessed June, 2018

IntroductIon most were poor and jobless, so she 
The above case is an example of planned to do something to solve 
a successful organisation which their problems because she knew 
is amongst the top companies in that imparting skills for livelihood is 
India. It has risen to the top because needed but she had no idea of how to 
of its quality of management. implement her idea. 
Management is required in all In August 2012, she met Abishek 
kinds of organisations — those Lama, the Branch Manager of 
manufacturing handlooms, trading NEDFI, Namchi Branch, a financial 
in consumer goods or providing corporation which support local 
hairstyling services and even in people with skills development 
non-business organisations. Let us programs and also channelize 
take another example. them into revenue generating 

Smita Rai is a 38-year old activities. Smita got interested. “I 
entrepreneur who grew up in a love making candles, then, why not 
rural district called Namchi, South convert my hobby into a venture 
Sikkim. She was very good in art and involve these rural women 
and craft particularly, Wax moulds. also”, she thought. This led to the 
She loved to make candles, often she establishment of Namchi Designer 
make into toys and small pieces of art Candles with the help of NEDFI, 
with wax and used it as a gift for her some financial institutions and 
friends and relatuves. She was loved support from different stakeholders 
and appreciated for these. Smita in various dimensions. 
was never happy with the conditions Since then, the women have never 
of the women in her district as looked back, despite challenges. The 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   2 24-09-2019   12:15:10 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 3

women also faced a lot of harassment delivery of goods are met. In the 
but they could overcome all course of the day, she meets 
those troubles. customers for a general feedback 

Namchi Designer Candles has and any suggestions that they 
100 per cent women as employees may have. 
and they also produce varieties of Smita is managing Namchi Designer 
candles. During Diwali, they produce Candles. So is the Principal managing 
customized candles meant for the your school. They all manage 
occasion. These Diwali themed candle organisations. Schools, hospitals, 
has been a success in Sikkim as its shops and large corporations are all 
demand increases on a yearly basis. organisations with diverse goals that 

Namchi Designer Candles has been are aimed at achieving something. 
receiving numerous awards such as No matter what the organisation is or 
North East Women Entrepreneur what its goals might be, they all have 
of the year 2015-2016 for Sikkim something in common-management 
and Sreemanta Shankar Mission and managers.
of Guwahati on 26th April 2018 at You have observed that Smita’s 
New Delhi. work as a manager consists of 

A typical day in Smita’s life a series of different activities or 
consists of a series of interrelated functions aimed at achieving the 
and continuous functions. She has goals of the organisation. These 
to plan a special festive collection interconnected and interdependent 
for Diwali. This means organising functions are part of management. 
more funds and recruiting more Successful organisations do not 
workers. She also has to regularly achieve their goals by chance but 
communicate with her suppliers by following a deliberate process 
to ensure that deadlines regarding called ‘management’.

Definitions of Management
“Management is the process of designing and maintaining an environment in which 

individuals, working together in groups, efficiently accomplish selected aims.”
 Harold Koontz and Heinz Weihrich

“Management is defined as t he process of planning, organising, actuating and controlling 
an organisation’s operations in order to achieve coordination of the human and material 
resources essential in the effective and efficient attainment of objectives.” 

Robert L. Trewelly and M. Gene Newport
“Management is the process of working with and through others to effectively achieve 

organisational objectives by efficiently using limited resources in the changing environment.”
Kreitner

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   3 24-09-2019   12:15:10 PM



4 Business Studies

Management is essential for all Management, has therefore, been 
organisations big or small, profit or defined as a process of getting things 
non-profit, services or manufacturing. done with the aim of achieving goals 
Management is necessary so that effectively and efficiently. We need 
individuals make their best contri- to analyse this definition. There 
bution towards group objectives. are certain terms which require 

Management consists of a series elaboration. These are (a) process, (b) 
of interrelated functions that are effectively, and (c) efficiently.
performed by all managers. Later in Process in the definition means the 
this chapter you will understand that primary functions or activities that 
although both of them are managers, management performs to get things 
they function at different levels in done. These functions are planning, 
the organisation. The time spent organising, staffing, directing and 
by managers in different functions controlling which we will discuss later 
however is different. Managers at the in the chapter and the book.
top level spend more time in planning Being effective or doing work 
and organising than managers at effectively basically means finishing 
lower levels of the organisation. the given task. Effectiveness in 

management is concerned with doing 
concept the right task, completing activities 
Management is a very popular term and achieving goals. In other words, 
and has been used extensively for it is concerned with the end result.
all types of activities and mainly for But it is not enough to just 
taking charge of different activities in complete the tasks. There is another 
any enterprise. As you have seen from aspect also, i.e., being efficient or as 
the above example and case study we say doing work efficiently.
that management is an activity which Efficiency means doing the task 
is necessary wherever there is a group correctly and with minimum cost. 
of people working in an organisation. There is a kind of cost-benefit 
People in organisations are performing analysis involved and the relationship 
diverse tasks but they are all working between inputs and outputs. If 
towards the same goal. Management by using less resources (i.e., the 
aims at guiding their efforts towards inputs) more benefits are derived 
achieving a common objective — a (i.e., the outputs) then efficiency has 
goal. Thus, management has to see increased. Efficiency is also increased 
that tasks are completed and goals when for the same benefit or outputs, 
are achieved (i.e., effectiveness) with fewer resources are used and less 
the least amount of resources at a costs are incurred. Input resources 
minimum cost (i.e., efficiency). are money, materials, equipment and 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   4 24-09-2019   12:15:10 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 5

persons required to do a particular This is a case of being efficient but 
task. Obviously, management is not effective since the goods did not 
concerned with the efficient use reach the market.
of these resources, because they Therefore, it is important for 
reduce costs and ultimately lead to management to achieve goals 
higher profits. (ef fectiveness) with minimum 

resources i.e., as efficiently as possible 
Effectiveness versus while maintaining a balance between 
Efficiency effectiveness and efficiency. Usually 
These two terms are different but they high efficiency is associated with 
are interrelated. For management, high effectiveness which is the aim of 
it is important to be both effective all managers. But undue emphasis 
and efficient. Effectiveness and on high efficiency without being 
efficiency are two sides of the same effective is also not desirable. Poor 
coin. But these two aspects need management is due to both ineffi-
to be balanced and management ciency and ineffectiveness. 
at times, has to compromise with 
efficiency. For example, it is easier characterIstIcs of 
to be effective and ignore efficiency ManageMent
i.e., complete the given task but at After going through some of the 
a high cost. Suppose, a company’s definitions we find some elements 
target production is 5000 units in that may be called the basic 
a year. To achieve this target the characteristics of management:
manager has to operate on double  (i) Management is a goal-oriented 
shifts due to power failure most of the process: An organisation has a 
time. The manager is able to produce set of basic goals which are the 
5000 units but at a higher production basic reason for its existence. 
cost. In this case, the manager was These should be simple and 
effective but not so efficient, since for clearly stated. Different organ-
the same output, more inputs (labour isations have different goals. For 
cost, electricity costs) were used. example, the goal of a retail store 

At times, a business may con- may be to increase sales, but the 
centrate more on producing goods goal of The Spastics Society of 
with fewer resources i.e., cutting India is to impart education to 
down cost but not achieving the children with special needs. 
target production. Consequently, the Management unites the efforts 
goods do not reach the market and of different individuals in the 
hence the demand for them declines organisation towards achieving 
and competitors enter the market. these goals.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   5 24-09-2019   12:15:10 PM



6 Business Studies

The Management Mantra from GE
Jack Welch was appointed CEO of GE in 1981. At that time the firm had a market 
capitalisation of $13 billion. In 2000 when he stepped down the firm’s turnover had 
increased multifold to $500 billion. What was the secret of Welch’s success? He has laid 
down the following pointers for managers to be successful: 
n Create a vision and then ignite your organisation to make this vision a reality. 

Get people so passionate about what they are doing that they cannot wait to execute 
this plan. Have great energy, competitive spirit and the ability to spark excitement and 
achieve results. Search for leaders who have the same qualities.

n Focus on strategic issues. Your job is to understand the vital issues within each of your 
businesses. Recognise the talent needed to win in those markets. 

n Focus on the main issue . Your job is to see the big picture. Don’t manage every detail. 
Don’t get caught up in the minute details, but instead inspire others to execute some 
of your vision. Surround yourself with great people and trust them to do their job and 
contribute their best to the organisation.

n Involve everyone and welcome great ideas from everywhere. Anyone can be a 
leader, just so long as they contribute, and the most meaningful way for anyone to 
contribute is to come up with a good idea. Business is all about getting the best ideas 
from everyone. New ideas are the lifeblood of the organisation, the fuel that makes it 
run. “The hero is the person with a new idea.” There is simply nothing more important 
to an organisation than expressing ideas and creating a vision.

n Lead by example. To spark others to perform, you must lead by example. Jack Welch’s 
mastery of the four E’s of leadership – Energy, Energise, Edge, and Execution – was 
always in evidence. “He had great energy, sparked others, had incredible competitive 
spirit, and had a record of execution that was second to none. This is a key of the 
Welch phenomenon. Had he been lacking in any of the traits he espoused, he would 
not have commanded such acclaim.”

Source: www.ge.co.in

 (ii) Management is all pervasive:  (iii) Management is multidimen-
The activities involved in managing sional: Management is a 
an enterprise are common to all complex activity that has three 
organisations whether economic, main dimensions. These are:
social or political. A petrol pump (a) Management of work: All 
needs to be managed as much organisations exist for the 
as a hospital or a school. What performance of some work. In 
managers do in India, the USA, a factory, a product is 
Germany or Japan is the same. manufactured, in a garment 
How they do it may be quite store a customer’s need is 
different. This difference is due satisfied and in a hospital a 
to the differences in culture, patient is treated. Management 
tradition and history. translates this work in terms 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   6 24-09-2019   12:15:10 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 7

of goals to be achieved and (i) it implies dealing with 
assigns the means to achieve employees as individuals with 
it. This is done in terms of diverse needs and behavior; 
problems to be solved, (ii) it also means dealing with 
decisions to be made, plans to individuals as a group of people. 
be established, budgets to be The task of management is to 
prepared, responsibilities to make people work towards 
be assigned and authority to achieving the organisation’s 
be delegated. goals, by making their 

(b) Management of people: Human strengths effective and their 
resources or people are an weaknesses irrelevant.
organisation’s greatest asset. (c) Management of operations: No 
Despite all developments in matter what the organisation, 
technology “getting work done it has some basic product or 
through people” is still a major service to provide in order to 
task for the manager. Managing survive. This requires a prod-
people has two dimensions uction process which entails 

Together Everyone 
Achieves More as 

a TEAM

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   7 24-09-2019   12:15:16 PM



8 Business Studies

the flow of input material and day. Some days she may spend 
the technology for transfor- more time in planning a future 
ming this input into the desired exhibition and on another day, 
output for consumption. This she may spend time in sorting 
is interlinked with both the out an employee’s problem. The 
management of work and the task of a manager consists of an 
management of people. ongoing series of functions.

 (iv) Management is a continuous  (v) Management is a group activity: 
process: The process of manage- An organisation is a collection of 
ment is a series of continuous, diverse individuals with different 
composite, but separate functions needs. Every member of the 
(planning, organising, directing, group has a different purpose 
staffing and controlling). These for joining the organisation but 
functions are simultaneously as members of the organisation 
performed by all managers they work towards fulfilling 
all the time. You may have the common organisational 
observed that Smita at Namchi goal. This requires team work 
Designer Candles performs and coordination of individual 
several different tasks in a single effort in a common direction. 

Management –  
a multidimensional 
activity

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   8 24-09-2019   12:15:16 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 9

At the same time management organisation there are different 
should enable all its members to objectives and management has to 
grow and develop as needs and achieve all objectives in an effective 
opportunities change. and efficient manner. Objectives 

 (vi) Management is a dynamic can be classified into organisational 
function: Management is a objectives, social objectives and 
dynamic function and has to personal or individual objectives.
adapt itself to the changing  (i) Organisational Objectives: 
environment. An organisation Management is responsible for 
interacts with its external envi- setting and achieving objectives 
ronment which consists of for the organisation. It has to 
various social, economic and achieve a variety of objectives in 
political factors. In order to be all areas considering the interest 
successful, an organisation must of all stakeholders including, 
change itself and its goals shareholders, employees, cust-
according to the needs of the omers and the government. The 
environment. You probably know main objective of any organisation 
that McDonalds, the fast food should be to utilise human 
giant made major changes in its and material resources to the 
menu to be able to survive in the maximum possible advantage, 
Indian market. i.e., to fulfill the economic 

 (vii) Management is an intangible objectives of a business. These 
force: Management is an intangi- are survival, profit and growth. 
ble force that cannot be seen but   Survival: The basic objectives 
its presence can be felt in the of any business is survival. 
way the organisation functions. Management must strive to 
The effect of management is ensure the survival of the 
noticeable in an organisation organisation. In order to survive, 
where targets are met according to an organisation must earn 
plans, employees are happy and enough revenues to cover costs.
satisfied, and there is orderliness   Profit: Mere survival is not enough 
instead of chaos. for business. Management has 

o to ensure that the organisation 
bjectIves of ManageMent makes a profit. Profit provides a 

Management seeks to achieve vital incentive for the continued 
certain objectives which are the successful operation of the 
desired result of any activity. They enterprise. Profit is essential for 
must be derived from the basic covering costs and risks of the 
purpose of the business. In any business.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   9 24-09-2019   12:15:16 PM



10 Business Studies

  Growth: A business needs to add the number of products or the 
to its prospects in the long run, increase in capital investment, 
for this it is important for the etc. There can be other indicators 
business to grow. To remain in of growth. 
the industry, management must  (ii) Social objectives: It involves 
exploit fully the growth potential the creation of benefit for 
of the organisation. Growth of society. As a part of society, 
a business can be measured in every organisation whether it is 
terms of sales volume increase business or non-business, has 
in the number of employees, a social obligation to fulfill. This 

ITC – Empowering Rural India
A quiet digital revolution is reshaping the lives of farmers in remote Indian villages.
In these villages, farmers grow soyabeans, wheat and coffee in small plots of land, 
as they have done for thousands of years. A typical village has no reliable electricity 
and has antiquated telephone lines. The farmers are largely illiterate and have never 
seen a computer. But farmers in these villages are conducting e-business through an 
initiative called E-Choupal, created by ITC, one of India’s largest consumer product 
and agribusiness companies.

ITC’s E-Chaupal initiative is a fine example of a business organisation fulfilling 
corporate social responsibility. The basic aim of the programme is to provide 
farmers in rural India with the opportunity to make use of a direct marketing 
channel eliminating multiple intermediation and wasteful handling and unnecessary 
transaction costs. It is the single-largest information technology-based intervention 
by a corporate entity in rural India, transforming the Indian farmer into a progressive 
knowledge-seeking citizen, enriching him with knowledge and elevating him to a 
new order of empowerment.

E-Choupal delivers real-time information and customised knowledge to improve 
the farmer’s decision-making ability, thereby better aligning farm output to market 
demands; securing better quality, productivity and improved price discovery. Given 
the low levels of literacy in the rural sector, the role of the Choupal Sanchalak, the 
lead farmer of the village, in facilitating physical interface between the computer 
terminal and the farmers is central to the project. E-Choupal Smart Cards enable 
farmer identification to provide customised information on the E-Choupal website. 
Online transactions are captured to reward farmers for volume and value of usage.

The E-Chaupal initiative has found its way into the Harvard Business School as a 
leading case study illustarating the use of modern technology by a leading business 
house for the benefit of the rural poor.

Source: Mohanbir Sawhney, McCormick Tribune Professor of 
Technology, Kellogg School of Management, USA.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   10 24-09-2019   12:15:16 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 11

refers to consistently creating for achieving the goals of the 
economic value for various organisation. The task of a manager 
constituents of society. This is to give a common direction to 
includes using environmental the individual effort in achieving 
friendly methods of production, the overall goal of the organisation.
giving employment opportunities  (ii) Management increases effici­
to the underpreviledged sections ency: The aim of a manager is 
of society and providing basic to reduce costs and increase 
amenities like schools and productivity through better 
healthcare, etc., for community. planning, organising, directing, 
The box given below illustrates staffing and controlling the 
how a company can fulfill its activities of the organisation.
social responsibility.  (iii) Management creates a dynamic 

 (iii) Personnel objectives: Organi- organisation: All organisations 
sations are made up of people have to function in an environment 
who have different personalities, which is constantly changing. It 
backgrounds, experiences and is generally seen that individuals 
objectives. They all become part in an organisation resist change 
of the organisation to satisfy as it often means moving from a 
their diverse needs. These vary familiar, secure environment into 
from financial needs such as a newer and more challenging 
competitive salaries and perks, one. Management helps people 
social needs such as peer adapt to these changes so that 
recognition and higher level the organisation is able to 
needs such as personal growth maintain its competitive edge. 
and development. Management  (iv) Management helps in achieving 
has to reconcile personal goals personal objectives: A manager 
with organisational objectives for motivates and leads his team in 
harmony in the organisation. such a manner that individual 

members are able to achieve 
Importance of management personal goals while contributing 
Having understood that management to the overall organisational 
is a universal activity that is integral objective. Through motivation 
to any organisation we now examine and leadership the management 
some of the reasons that have made helps individuals to develop 
management so important: team spirit, cooperation and 
 (i) Management helps in achieving commitment to group success. 

group goals: Management  (v) Management helps in the 
is required not for itself but development of society: An orga-

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   11 19-11-2019   5:06:37 PM



12 Business Studies

nisation has multiple objectives relationships. Over a period of time, 
to serve the purpose of the it has grown into a dynamic subject 
different groups that constitute it. with its own special characteristics. 
In the process of fulfilling all However, one question that needs 
these, management helps in the to be addressed pertaining to the 
development of the organisation nature of management is whether 
and through that it helps in the it is a science or an art or both? 
development of society. It helps to In order to answer this let us 
provide good quality products examine the features of both science 
and services, creates employment and art to see how far management 
opportu nities, adopts new fulfills them.
techno-logy for the greater good 
of the people and leads the path ManageMent as an art
towards growth and development. What is art? Art is the skillful and 

personal application of existing 
nature of ManageMent knowledge to achieve desired 
Management is as old as civilisation. results. It can be acquired through 
Although modern organisations are study, observation and experience. 
of recent origin, organised activity has Since art is concerned with personal 
existed since the time of the ancient application of knowledge some kind 
civilisations. In fact, organisations of ingenuity and creativity is required 
may be considered the distinguishing to practice the basic principles learnt. 
feature that separated civilised society The basic features of an art are 
from uncivilised ones. The earliest as follows:
management practices were a set of  (i) Existence of theoretical 
rules and regulations that grew out knowledge: Art presupposes the 
of the experiences of governmental existence of certain theoretical 
and commercial activities. The knowledge. Experts in their 
development of trade and commerce respective areas have derived 
gradually led to the development of certain basic principles which 
management principles and practices. are applicable to a particular 

The term ‘management’ today has form of art. For example, 
several different connotations that literature on dancing, public 
highlight the different aspects of its speaking, acting or music is 
nature. The study of management has widely recognised. 
evolved over a period of time along  (ii) Personalised application: The 
with the modern organisations; based use of this basic knowledge varies 
both on the experience and practice from individual to individual. 
of managers and a set of theoretical Art, therefore, is a very person-

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   12 24-09-2019   12:15:16 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 13

alised concept. For example, two manner. A good manager works 
dancers, two speakers, two actors, through a combination of 
or two writers will always differ practice, creativity, imagination, 
in demonstrating their art. initiative and innovation. A 

 (iii) Based on practice and manager achieves perfection 
creativity: All art is practical. Art after long practice. Students of 
involves the creative practice of management also apply these 
existing theoretical knowledge. principles differently depending 
We know that all music is based on how creative they are.
on seven basic notes. However,  (iii) A manager applies this acquired 
what makes the composition of knowledge in a personalised 
a musician unique or different and skillful manner in the light 
is his use of these notes in a of the realities of a given situation. 
creative manner that is entirely He is involved in the activities of 
his own interpretation. the organisation, studies critical 

Management can be said to be situations and formulates his 
an art since it satisfies the following own theories for use in a given 
criteria: situation. This gives rise to 
 (i) A successful manager practices different styles of management

the art of management in the The best managers are committed 
day-to-day job of managing and dedicated individuals; highly 
an enterprise based on study, trained and educated, with personal 
observation and experience. qualities such as ambition, self- 
There is a lot of literature motivation, creativity and 
available in various areas of imagination, a desire for development 
management like marketing, of the self and the organisation 
finance and human resources they belong to. All management 
which the manager has to practices are based on the same set 
specialise in. There is existence of principles; what distinguishes 
of theoretical knowledge. a successful manager from a less 

 (ii) There are various theories of successful one is the ability to put 
management, as propounded these principles into practice. 
by many management thinkers, 
which prescribe certain ManageMent as a scIence
universal principles. A manager Science is a systematised body of 
applies these scientific methods knowledge that explains certain 
and body of knowledge to a general truths or the operation of 
given situation, an issue or a general laws. The basic features of 
problem, in his own unique science are as follows:

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   13 24-09-2019   12:15:16 PM



14 Business Studies

Some Interesting Cross-disciplinary Perspectives
Anthropology – Anthropology is the study of societies, which helps us learn 
about human beings and their activities. Anthropologists’ work on cultures and 
environments, for instance, has helped managers to better understand differences 
in fundamental values, attitudes, and behavior between people in different 
countries and within different organisations.
Economics – Economics is concerned with the allocation and distribution of 
scarce resources. It provides us with an understanding of the changing economy 
as well as the role of competition and free markets in a global context. An 
understanding of free trade and protectionist policies is absolutely essential to any 
manager operating in the global marketplace, and these topics are addressed by 
economists.
Philosophy – Philosophy courses inquire into the nature of things, particularly 
values and ethics. Ethics are standards that govern human conduct. These ethics 
have shaped today’s organisations by providing a basis for legitimate authority, 
linking rewards to performance, and justifying the existence of business and the 
corporate form.
Political Science – Political science is the study of the behavior of individuals and 
groups within a political environment. Management is affected by a nation’s form 
of government – by whether it allows its citizens to hold property, by its citizens’ 
ability to engage in and enforce contracts, and by the appeal mechanisms available 
to redress grievances. A nation’s stand on property, contracts, and justice, in turn, 
shapes the type, form, and policies of its organisations.
Psychology – Psychology is the science that seeks to measure, explain, 
and sometimes change the behaviour of humans and other animals. Today’s 
managers confront both a diverse customer base and a diverse set of employees. 
Psychologists’ efforts to understand gender and cultural diversity provide 
managers with a better perception of the needs of their changing customer and 
employee populations. Psychology courses are also relevant to managers in terms 
of gaining a better understanding of motivation, leadership, trust, employee 
selection, performance appraisals, and training techniques.
Sociology – Sociology is the study of people in relation to their fellow human 
beings. What are some of the sociological issues that have relevance to managers? 
Here are a few. How are societal changes such as globalisation, increasing 
cultural diversity, changing gender roles, and varying forms of family life affecting 
organisational practices? What are the implications of schooling practices and 
education trends on future employees’ skills and abilities? Answers to questions 
such as these have a major effect on how managers operate their businesses.

Source: Fundamentals of Management
Stephen P. Robbins
David A. DeCenzo

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   14 24-09-2019   12:15:16 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 15

 (i) Systematised body of knowledge: of a common vocabulary for a 
Science is a systematic body better understanding of their 
of knowledge. Its principles are work situation.
based on a cause and effect  (ii) The principles of management 
relationship. For example, the have evolved over a period 
phenomenon of an apple falling of time based on repeated 
from a tree towards the ground experimentation and observation 
is explained by the law of gravity. in different types of organisations. 

 (ii) Principles based on experimen- However, since management 
tation: Scientific principles are deals with human beings and 
first developed through observation human behaviour, the outcomes 
and then tested through of these experiments are not 
repeated experimentation under capable of being accurately 
controlled conditions. predicted or replicated. Therefore, 

 (iii) Universal validity: Scientific management can be called an 
principles have universal validity inexact science. Despite these 
and application. limitations, management scholars 

Based on the above features, we have been able to identify general 
can say that management has some principles of management. For 
characteristics of science. example, scientific management 
 (i) Management has a systematised principles by F.W. Taylor 

body of knowledge. It has its and Functional Management 
own theory and principles that principles by Henri Fayol which 
have developed over a period you will study in the next chapter.
of time, but it also draws on  (iii) Since the principles of mana-
other disciplines such as gement are not as exact as 
Economics, Sociology, the principles of science, their 
Psychology and Mathematics. application and use is not universal. 
Like all other organised They have to be modified according 
activity, management has its to a given situation. However, they 
own vocabulary of terms and provide managers with certain 
concepts. For example, all of standardised techniques that 
us discuss sports like cricket can be used in dif ferent 
and soccer using a common situations. These principles 
vocabulary. The players also are also used for training and 
use these terms to communicate development of managers. 
with each other. Similarly You must have understood from the 
managers need to communicate foregoing discussion that manage-
with one another with the help ment has features of both art and 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   15 24-09-2019   12:15:16 PM



16 Business Studies

science. The practice of management degree. For example, to become 
is an art. However, managers can a chartered accountant in 
work better if their practice is based on India a candidate has to 
the principles of management. These clear a specified examination 
principles constitute the science of conducted by the Institute of 
management. Management as an Chartered Accountants of India.
art and a science are therefore not  (iii) Professional association: All 
mutually exclusive, but complement professions are affiliated to a 
each other. professional association which 

regulates entry, grants certificate 
ManageMent as a professIon of practice and formulates and 
You have understood so far that enforces a code of conduct. To be 
all forms of organised activity need able to practice in India lawyers 
to be managed. You would also have to become members of the 
have observed that organisations Bar Council which regulates 
look for individuals with specific and controls their activities.
qualifications and experience to  (iv) Ethical code of conduct: All 
manage them. It has also been professions are bound by a code 
observed that there has been an of conduct which guides the 
increase in the corporate form of behaviour of its members. All 
business on the one hand and doctors, for example, take the 
increasing emphasis on managed oath of ethical practice at the 
business concerns. Does this imply time they enter the profession. 
that management is a profession? To  (v) Service motive: The basic 
answer this question let us examine motive of a profession is to 
the salient features of a profession serve their client’s interests 
and see whether management by rendering dedicated and 
satisfies them. committed service. The task of 

A profession has the following a lawyer is to ensure that his 
characteristics: client gets justice.
 (i) Well-defined body of know- Management does not meet 

ledge: All professions are based the exact criteria of a profession. 
on a well-defined body of However, it does have some of the 
knowledge that can be acquired features of a profession:
through instruction.  (i) All over the world there is 

 (ii) Restricted entry: The entry to a marked growth in management 
profession is restricted through as a discipline. It is based on a 
an examination or through systematic body of knowledge 
acquiring an educational comprising well-defined 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   16 24-09-2019   12:15:17 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 17

principles based on a variety Association) that has laid down a code 
of business situations. This of conduct to regulate the activities 
knowledge can be acquired of their members. There is, however, 
at different colleges and professional no compulsion for managers to be 
institutes and through a number members of such an association nor 
of books and journals. The does it have any statutory backing. 
subject of management is taught  (iv) The basic purpose of manage-
at different institutions. Some ment is to help the organisation 
of these have been set up with achieve its stated goal. This may 
the specific purpose of providing be profit maximisation for a 
management education such business enterprise and service 
as the Indian Institutes of for a hospital. However, profit 
Management (IIMs) in India. maximisation as the objective 
Entry to different institutes is of management does not hold 
usually through an examination. true and is fast changing. 

 (ii) There is no restriction on anyone Therefore, if an organisation 
being designated or appointed has a good management team 
as manager in any business that is efficient and effective it 
enterprise. Anyone can be automatically serves society by 
called a manager irrespective of providing good quality products 
the educational qualifications at reasonable prices.
possessed. LeveLs of ManageMent

  Unlike professions such as Management is a universal term 
medicine or law which require used for certain functions performed 
a practicing doctor or lawyer to 
possess valid degrees, nowhere by individuals in an enterprise who 
in the world is it mandatory are bound together in a hierarchy of 
for a manager to possess any relationships. Every individual in the 
such specific degree. But hierarchy is responsible for successful 
professional knowledge and completion of a particular task. To be 
training is considered to be a able to fulfill that responsibility he is 
desirable qualification, since assigned a certain amount of authority 
there is greater demand for those or the right to take a decision. This 
who possess degrees or diplomas authority-responsibility relationship 
from reputed institutions. 
Therefore, as such the second binds individuals as superiors and 
criterion has not been strictly met. subordinates and gives rise to different 

 (iii) There are several associations of levels in an organisation. Generally 
practising managers in India, like speaking there are three levels in the 
the AIMA (All India Management hierarchy of an organisation.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   17 24-09-2019   12:15:17 PM



18 Business Studies

 (i) Top Management: They consist production manager. Middle 
of the senior-most executives of the management is responsible for 
organisation by whatever name implementing and controlling 
they are called. They are usually plans and strategies developed 
referred to as the chairman, by top management. At the 
the chief executive officer, chief same time they are responsible 
operating officer, president and for all the activities of first line 
vice-president. Top management managers. Their main task is to 
is a team consisting of managers carry out the plans formulated 
from different functional levels, by the top managers. For this they 
heading finance, marketing etc. need to: (i) interpret the policies 
For example chief finance officer, framed by top management, 
vice president (marketing). Their (ii) ensure that their department 
basic task is to integrate diverse has the necessary personnel, 
elements and coordinate the (iii) assign necessary duties 
activities of different departments and responsibilities to them, 
according to the overall objectives (iv) motivate them to achieve 
of the organisation. These top desired objectives, and (v) co- 
level managers are responsible operate with other departments 
for the welfare and survival of for smooth functioning of the 
the organisation. They analyse 
the business environment and 
its implications for the survival of 
the firm. They formulate overall 
organisational goals and strategies 
for their achievement. They are 
responsible for all the activities of 
the business and for its impact 
on society. The job of the top 
manager is complex and stressful, 
demanding long hours and 
commitment to the organisation. 

 (ii) Middle Management: is the 
link between top and lower level 
managers. They are subordinate 
to top managers and superior 
to the first line managers. 
They are usually known as “You don’t learn management 
division heads, for example from books alone...”

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   18 24-09-2019   12:15:18 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 19

organisation. At the same time management to the workers. 
they are responsible for all the Through their efforts quality of 
activities of first line managers. output is maintained, wastage 

 (iii) Supervisory or Operational of materials is minimised and 
Management: Foremen and safety standards are maintained. 
supervisors comprise the lower The quality of workmanship and 
level in the hierarchy of the the quantity of output depends 
organisation. Supervisors on the hard work, discipline and 
directly oversee the efforts of loyalty of the workers.
the workforce. Their authority 
and responsibility is limited functIons of ManageMent
according to the plans drawn Management is described as the 
by the top management. process of planning, organising, 
Supervisory management plays directing and controlling the efforts 
a very important role in the of organisational members and of 
organisation since they interact using organisational resources to 
with the actual work force and pass achieve specific goals. 
on instructions of the middle Planning is the function of 

determining in advance what is to 
be done and who is to do it. This 
implies setting goals in advance 
and developing a way of achieving 
them efficiently and effectively. In 
Smita’s organisation the objective 

TOP is production and sale of candles. 
MANAGEMENT Smita has to decide quantities, variety 

MIDDLE
MANAGEMENT

OPERATIONAL  
MANAGEMENT

Managerial 
Levels

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   19 24-09-2019   12:15:18 PM



20 Business Studies

and colour and then allocate resources important aspect of management is 
for their purchase from different to make sure that the right people 
suppliers. Planning cannot prevent with the right qualifications are 
problems, but it can predict them available at the right places and 
and prepare contingency plans to times to accomplish the goals of 
deal with them if and when they the organisation. This is also known 
occur. as the human resource function 
Organising is the management and it involves activities such as 
function of assigning duties, recruitment, selection, placement 
grouping tasks, establishing and training of personnel. Infosys 
authority and allocating resources Technologies which develops 

required to carry out a specific software needs systems analysts and 
programmers. 

plan. Once a specific plan has been 
established for the accomplishment Directing involves leading, influ-

of an organisational goal, the encing and motivating employees 
to perform the tasks assigned to 

organising function examines the them. This requires establishing 
activities and resources required to an atmosphere that encourages 
implement the plan. It determines employees to do their best. Motivation 
what activities and resources are and leadership are two key 
required. It decides who will do a components of direction. Directing 
particular task, where it will be also involves communicating 
done, and when it will be done. effectively as well as supervising 
Organising involves the grouping of employees at work. Motivating 
the required tasks into manageable workers means simply creating an 
departments or work units and the environment that makes them want 
establishment of authority and to work. Leadership is influencing 
reporting relationships within the others to do what the leader wants 
organisational hierarchy. Proper them to do. A good manager directs 
organisational techniques help through praise and criticism in 
in the accomplishment of work such a way that it brings out the 
and promote both the efficiency of best in the employee. 
operations and the effectiveness of Controlling is the management 
results. Different kinds of business function of monitoring organisational 
require different structures performance towards the attainment 
according to the nature of work. of organisational goals. The task 
You will read more about this in a of controlling involves establishing 
later chapter. standards of performance, measuring 
Staffing simply stated, is finding the current performance, comparing 
right people for the right job. A very this with established standards and 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   20 24-09-2019   12:15:18 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 21

taking corrective action where any and finance to ensure continuity 
deviation is found. Here management in the working of the organisation. 
must determine what activities and Coordination is sometimes considered 
outputs are critical to success, how a separate function of management. 
and where they can be measured It is however, the essence of 
and who should have the authority management, for achieving harmony 
to take corrective action. among individual efforts towards 

The various functions of a the accomplishment of group goals. 
manager are usually discussed in Each managerial function is an 
the order given above, suggesting exercise contributing individually to 
that a manager first plans, then coordination. Coordination is implicit 
organises, puts staff in position, and inherent in all functions of an 
then directs, and finally controls. organisation.
In reality, managers are rarely The process of coordinating the 
able to carry out these functions activities of an organisation begins 
in isolation. The activities of a at the planning stage itself. Top 
manager are interrelated and it is management plans for the entire 
often difficult to pinpoint where one organisation. According to these 
ended and the other began. plans the organisational structure 
coordInatIon — the is developed and staffed. In order to 

e ensure that these plans are executed 
ssence of ManageMent according to plans directing is 

You have understood by now that required. Any discrepancies between 
a manager has to perform five actual and realised activities are 
interrelated functions in the process then taken care of at the stage of 
of managing an organisation which controlling. It is through the process 
is a system made up of different of coordination that a manager 
interlinked and interdependent 
subsystems. A manager has to link ensures the orderly arrangement of 
these diverse groups towards the individual and group efforts to ensure 
achievement of a common goal. unity of action in the realisation of 
The process by which a manager common objectives. Coordination 
synchronises the activities of therefore involves synchronisation 
different departments is known as of the different actions or efforts of 
coordination. the various units of an organisation. 

Coordination is the force that This provides the requisite amount, 
binds all the other functions of quality, timing and sequence of 
management. It is the common efforts which ensures that planned 
thread that runs through all activities objectives are achieved with a 
such as purchase, production, sales, minimum of conflict.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   21 24-09-2019   12:15:19 PM



22 Business Studies

characterIstIcs of the goals of the organisation. 
At Namchi Designer Candles, 

coordInatIon the production and sales 
The definitions given above department have to coordinate 
highlight the following features of their work, so that production 
coordination: takes place according to the 
 (i) Coordination integrates group demand in the market.

efforts: Coordination unifies  (iii) Coordination is a continuous 
unrelated or diverse interests process: Coordination is not 
into purposeful work activity. a one-time function but a 
It gives a common focus to continuous process. It begins at 
group effort to ensure that the planning stage and continues 
performance is as it was planned till controlling. Smita plans her 
and scheduled. dewali collection in the month 

 (ii) Coordination ensures unity of June itself. She has to then 
of action: The purpose of ensure that there is adequate 
coordination is to secure unity workforce and continuously 
of action in the realisation of monitor whether production is 
a common purpose. It acts proceeding according to plans. 
as the binding force between Her marketing department also 
departments and ensures that has to be briefed in time to 
all action is aimed at achieving prepare their promotional and 

advertising campaigns.
In the absence of coordination  (iv) Coordination is an all pervasive 
what results is chaos function: Coordination is required 

at all levels of management due 
to the interdependent nature of 
activities of various departments. 
It integrates the efforts of different 
departments and different levels. 
The purchase, production and 
sales departmental efforts have 
to be coordinated by Smita for 
achieving organisational objectives 
harmoniously. The purchase 
department is responsible for 
procuring fabric. This then 
becomes the basis of the activities 
of the production department 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   22 24-09-2019   12:15:21 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 23

and finally sales can take place. If and deliberate manner. 
fabric purchased is of an inferior Even where members of a 
quality or is not according to the department willingly cooperate 
specifications of the production and work, coordination gives a 
department, further sales will direction to that willing spirit. 
also decline. In the absence of Cooperation in the absence 
coordination there is overlapping of coordination may lead to 
and chaos instead of harmony wasted effort and coordination 
and integration of activities. without cooperation may 

 (v) Coordination is the responsibi- lead to dissatisfaction among 
lity  of  all managers: Coordi- employees.
nation is the function of every Coordination, therefore, is not a 
manager in the organisation. Top separate function of management, 
level managers need to coordinate but its very essence. For an 
with their subordinates to ensure organisation to effectively and 
that the overall policies for the efficiently achieve its objectives 
organisation are duly carried coordination is required. Like a 
out. Middle level management thread in a garland, coordination is 
coordinates with both the top a part of all management functions. 
level and first line managers. 
Operational level management IMportance of coordInatIon
coordinates the activities of its 
workers to ensure that work Coordination is important as it 
proceeds according to plans. integrates the efforts of individuals, 

 (vi) Coordination is a deliberate departments and specialists. The 
function: A manager has primary reason for coordination is 
to coordinate the efforts of that departments and individuals in 
different people in a conscious the organisation are interdependent, 

Definitions of Coordination
Coordination is balancing and keeping together the team by ensuring suitable allocation of 

tasks to the various members and seeing that the tasks are performed with harmony among 
the members themselves.  E.F.L. Brech

Coordination is the process whereby an executive develops an orderly pattern of 
group efforts among his subordinates and secures unity of action in the pursuit of common 
purpose.  McFarland

Coordination is the orderly synchronising of efforts of subordinates to provide proper 
amount, timing and quality of execution so that their united efforts lead to the stated 
objectives, namely, the common purpose of the enterprise.  Theo Haimann

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   23 24-09-2019   12:15:21 PM



24 Business Studies

i.e. they depend on each other their habits of work, background, 
for information and resources to approaches to situations and 
perform their respective activities. relationships with others. It 
Thus, managers need to reconcile becomes necessary to ensure that 
differences in approach, timing, all individuals work towards the 
effort or interest. At the same common goals of the organisation. 
time, there is a need to harmonise But employees may have their own 
individual goals and organisational individual goals also. Therefore, 
goals. for organisational efficiency, it is 

(i) Growth in size: As organisations important to harmonise individual 
grow in size, the number of people goals and organisational goals 
employed by the organisation also through coordination.
increases. At times, it may become (ii) Functional differentiation: 
difficult to integrate their efforts and Functions of an organisation are 
activities. All individuals differ in divided into departments, divisions 

‘DABBAWALLAS’ – Excellence through Coordination
The Dabbawallas of Mumbai is the story of a SIX SIGMA business enterprise. The success 
of the business lies in the complex yet well coordinated exercise that is carried out on the 
streets of Mumbai day after day. What is the secret behind the efficiency with which their 
business is conducted? 

The story of the dabbawallas begins in the kitchens of Mumbai. After they step out of their 
door, someone begins the time-consuming process of preparing the worker a fresh, home-
cooked lunch. What happens next for demonstrates the coordination of the dabbawallas 
system. The first dabbawalla picks up the tiffin from home and takes it to the nearest railway 
station.The second dabbawalla sorts out the dabbas at the railway station according to 
destination and puts them in the luggage carriage. The third one travels with the dabbas to 
the railway stations nearest to the destinations. The fourth one picks up dabbas from the 
railway station and drops them off at the offices.

By mid-morning, thousands of dabbawallas are bicycling through the streets of Mumbai, 
ensuring a hot home cooked lunch for their customers. The whole tiffin distribution requires 
negligible technology. The dabbawallas rely on low capital and use cycles, wooden carriages 
and local trains to achieve their target.There are several groups that work independently and 
network with each other to achieve their goal.

Each area is divided into several small distribution sectors and each sector is handled by 
a particular person. This person understands the address in that locality very well. Also, this 
perfection comes with practice. Many new employees work for months under the guidance 
of their seniors. 

Punctuality and time management are on top of the agenda for dabbawallas. Whatever be 
the circumstances, the dabbawallas never get delayed even by a few minutes.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   24 24-09-2019   12:15:21 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 25

and sections. In an organisation However, all departments and 
there may be separate departments individuals are interdependent 
of finance, production, marketing and they have to depend on each 
or human resources. All these other for information to perform 
departments may have their own their activities. The activity of 
objectives, policies and their own each department needs to be 
style of working. For example, the focused on attainment of common 
marketing department’s objective organisational goals. The process 
may be to increase sales by 10 per of linking the activities of various 
cent by offering discounts. But, the departments is accomplished 
finance department may not approve by coordination.
of such discounts as it means loss of (iii) Specialisation: Modern 
revenue. These kinds of conflict arise organisations are characterised 
in organisations because each unit/ by a high degree of specialisation. 
department is performing activities Specialisation arises out of the 
in isolation from others and barriers complexities of modern technology 
between departments are becoming and the diversity of tasks to be 
more rigid. performed. Organisations, therefore, 

Management in the Twenty-first Century
Even as you read this chapter, the organisation and its management are changing. As boundaries 
between cultures and nations get blurred and new communication technology makes it 
possible to think of the world as a ‘global village’, the scope of international and intercultural 
relationships is rapidly expanding. The modern organisation is a global organisation that has 
to be managed in a global perspective. What does this imply?

A global manager today is one who possesses what can be termed as ‘hard’ types of skills 
as well as ‘softer’ types of skills. Managers who understand analysis, strategy, engineering, 
and technology are still going to be needed, but extremely critical to global success are  
people who understand how teams work, how organisations work, how people are 
motivated.

A manager who really understands different cultures should be able to work in a West 
European, non-English speaking country, then move to a developing country like Malaysia 
or Kenya, and then be transferred to an office based in New York, USA, and be almost 
immediately productive in all three places. 

It can thus be understood that the role of a global manager has evolved in much the same 
way that the global industry and economy have evolved. It has changed from being a single 
dimensional role in a defined business context, to being a multi-faceted role that calls for a 
diverse combination of technical skills, soft management and people skills, and the ability to 
imbibe and learn different cultural experiences.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   25 24-09-2019   12:15:21 PM



26 Business Studies

need to employ a number of ManageMent In the 
specialists. Specialists usually 
think that they only are qualified to twenty-fIrst century
evaluate, judge and decide according Even as you read this chapter, the 
to their professional criteria. They organisation and its management are 
do not take advice or suggestions changing. As boundaries between 
from others in matters pertaining cultures and nations get blurred and 
to their area of specialisation. This new communication technology makes 
often leads to conflict amongst it possible to think of the world as a 
different specialists as well as others ‘global village’, the scope of international 
in the organisation. Therefore, and intercultural relationships is 
some coordination is required by an rapidly expanding. The modern 
independent person to reconcile the organisation is a global organisation 
differences in approach, interest or that has to be managed in a global 
opinion of the specialists. perspective. What does this imply?

Key Terms
Management  Process  Efficiency  Effectiveness  Art 

Science  Profession  Planning  Organising  Staffing 

Directing  Controlling  Coordination

Summary
Concept
Management is the process of planning, organising, staffing, 
directing and controlling the enterprise resources efficiently and 
effectively for achieving the goals of the organisation. Effectiveness 
in management is concerned with doing the right task, completing 
activities and achieving goals. Efficiency means doing the task 
correctly and with minimum cost.
Characteristics 
The key features of management are: (i) goal oriented process 
(ii) all pervasive (iii) multidimensional (iv) continuous process 
(v) group activity (vi) dynamic function (vii) tangible force. 
Objectives
Management fulfills three basic objectives: organisational, social 
and personal.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   26 24-09-2019   12:15:21 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 27

Importance
Management is important because it helps in achieving group 
goals, increases efficiency, creates a dynamic organisation, helps 
achieve personal objectives and contributes to the development 
of society. 
Nature
Management is a combination of an organised body of knowledge 
(science) and its skillful application (art). Although it does not 
satisfy all the requirements of a profession, it is to a large extent 
professional in character.
Levels
Management is considered a three-tier activity. The top management 
focuses on determination of objectives and policies, middle 
management attempts to achieve these objectives through the effort 
of other managers and supervisory or operational management 
directly oversees the efforts of the workforce.
Functions
All managers perform the following interrelated functions: Planning, 
Organising, Staffing, Directing and Controlling.
Coordination
Coordination is the essence of management. It is the process of 
achieving unity of action among interdependent activities and 
departments of an organisation.

Exercises
Very Short Answer Type:

 1.  What is meant by management?
 2. Name any two important characteristics of management.
 3. Identify and state the force that binds all the other functions 

of management.
 4. List any two indicators of growth of an organisation.
 5. Indian Railways has launched a new broad gauge solar 

power train which is going to be a path breaking leap towards 
making trains greener and more environment friendly. The 
solar power DEMU (Diesel Electric Multiple Unit) has 6 
trailer coaches and is expected to save about 21,000 liters 
of diesel and ensure a cost saving of Rs 12, 00,000 per year. 
Name the objectives of management achieved by Indian 
Railways in the above case.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   27 24-09-2019   12:15:21 PM



28 Business Studies

Short Answer Type:
 1. Ritu is the manager of the northern division of a large corporate 

house. At what level does she work in the organisation? What 
are her basic functions?

 2. State the basic features of management as a profession.
 3. Why is management considered to be a multi-dimensional 

concept?
 4. Company X is facing a lot of problems these days. It 

manufactures white goods like washing machines, microwave 
ovens, refrigerators and air conditioners. The company’s 
margins are under pressure and the profits and market 
share are declining. The production department blames 
marketing for not meeting sales targets and marketing 
blames production department for producing goods, which 
are not of good quality meeting customers’ expectations. The 
finance department blames both production and marketing 
for declining return on investment and bad marketing. State 
the quality of management that the company is lacking? What 
quality of management do you think the company is lacking? 
Explain briefly. What steps should the company management 
take to bring the company back on track?

 5. Coordination is the essence of management. Do you agree? 
Give reasons.

 6. Ashita and Lakshita are employees working in Dazzling 
enterprises dealing in costume jewellery. The firm secured 
an urgent order for 1,000 bracelets that were to be delivered 
within 4 days. They were assigned the responsibility of 
producing 500 bracelets each at a cost of Rs 100 per bracelet. 
Ashita was able to produce the required number within the 
stipulated time at the cost of Rs 55,000 whereas, Lakshita 
was able to produce only 450 units at a cost of Rs 90 per unit. 
State whether Ashita and Lakshita are efficient and effective. 
Give reasons to justify your answer.

Long Answer Type:
 1. Management is considered to be both an art and science. 

Explain.
 2. Do you think management has the characteristics of a full-

fledged profession?

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   28 24-09-2019   12:15:21 PM



Nature and Significance of Management 29

 3. “A successful enterprise has to achieve its goals effectively 
and efficiently.” Explain.

 4. Management is a series of continuous interrelated functions. 
Comment.

 5. A company wants to modify its existing product in the market 
due to decreasing sales. You can imagine any product about 
which you are familiar. What decisions/steps should each 
level of management take to give effect to this decision? 

 6. A firm plans in advance and has a sound organisation 
structure with efficient supervisory staff and control system 
but on several occasion it finds that plans are not being 
adhered to. It leads to confusion and duplication of work. 
Advise remedy.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_01.indd   29 24-09-2019   12:15:21 PM