ORGANISING 5
CHAPTER

Way To Go, Wipro!
It’s not quite there yet, but the goal is certainly within L E A R N I N G 
reach. One of India’s largest IT solutions providers, O B J E C T I V E S
Wipro Technologies, is taking on the likes of IBM and 
Accenture in its effort to be included among the largest After studying this chapter you 

should be able to:
and most successful technology services companies in 
the world. n Explain the concept of 

Restructuring Wipro was considered the organising;
most important step in becoming a global giant, n	Explain the process of 
driven by the goal towards improved customer- organising;
orientation. n	Describe the importance of 

During the past few months, Wipro separated organising;
itself into several subsidiaries by product line: n	Explain the meaning, advantages 
telecommunications, engineering, financial and disadvantages of functional 
services, etc. Each subsidiary brings in about $300 organisation;
million in annual earnings and is self-sufficient n	Explain the meaning, advantages  
with their own accounting books, personnel and and disadvantages of divisional 
administrative functions. organisation;

Wipro shifted from a centralised to  n	Explain the meaning, advantages 
decentralised management system. All and disadvantages of formal and 
responsibilities for growth lay with the informal organisation;
management of each entity. n	Distinguish between formal and 

“We tried to de-layer the organisation and informal organisation;
empower our business leaders with a much higher n	Explain the concept of 
degree of growth responsibility,” said Premji. “We delegation and decentralisation;
removed an entire layer [of executives]”. n	Describe the importance of 

delegation and decentralisation; 
Adapted from an article by Heide B. Malhotra and
for Epoch Times Washington D.C. n	Distinguish between delegation 

and decentralisation.

Once the plans have been laid down critical issue in accomplishing the 
and objectives specified therein, the goals specified in the planning 
next step is to organise resources process is structuring the work of an 
in a manner which leads to the organisation to adapt to the dynamic 
accomplishment of objectives. A business environment. The activities 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   109 08-08-2022   09:50:36



110 Business Studies

of an enterprise must be organised The organising function leads to the 
in such a manner that plans can be creation of an organisational structure 
successfully implemented. which includes the designing of roles 

For planning to be fruitful a number to be filled by suitably skilled people 
of considerations like resources that and defining the inter relationship 
will be needed, optimum utilisation between these roles so that ambi­
of the same translation of work into guity in performance of duties 
attainable tasks, empowering the can be eliminated. Not only is this 
workforce to accomplish these tasks important for productive cooperation 
etc., need to be understood and dealt between the personnel but also for 
with properly. clarification of extent of authority, 

It is evident from the way Wipro as well as responsibility for results 
has moved towards reaching for and logical grouping of activities. 
it’s goal of becoming a globally 
successful technology company, Meaning
that organising plays a significant Let us take an example to understand 
role in implementation of plans. how organising takes place. Have 

What has Wipro done to become a you ever paid attention to how, the 
contending force among other global school fete which you enjoy so much, 
giants? Are there lessons to be learnt actually takes place? What goes on 
from Wipro’s approach? behind the scene to make it the 

Wipro organised itself in a manner desired reality you want? The whole 
that allowed customer orientation to activity is divided into task groups 
dominate over other goals and diversified each dealing with a specific area like 
on the basis of product lines. It also the food committee, the decoration 
modified the relationships within the committee, the ticketing committee 
management hierarchy to suit the goals.

The management function of and so on. These are under the 
organising ensures that efforts are overall supervision of the official in 
directed towards the attainment charge of the event. Coordinating 
of goals laid down in the planning relationships are established among 
function in such a manner that the various groups to enable smooth 
resources are used optimally and interaction and clarity about each 
people are able to work collectively group’s contribution towards the 
and effectively for a common purpose. event. All the above activities are a 
Thus, it is in the context of effective part of the organising function. 
management that the organisation Organising essentially implies a 
function earns due importance. It is process which coordinates human 
a means for translating plans into efforts, assembles resources and 
action. integrates both into a unified whole 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   110 08-08-2022   09:50:36



Organising 111

to be utilised for achieving specified student supervises the work by 
objectives. grouping students, dividing the work, 

Organising can be defined as a assigning each group their quota and 
process that initiates implementation developing reporting relationships 
of plans by clarifying jobs and among them, the job will be done 
working relationships and effectively faster and in a better manner.
deploying resources for attainment From the above description, the 
of identified and desired results following steps emerge in the process 
(goals). of organising:

 (i) Identification and division 
StepS in the proceSS of of work: The first step in the 
organiSing process of organising involves 

identifying and dividing the 
Organising involves a series of steps work that has to be done in 
that need to be taken in order to accordance with previously 
achieve the desired goal. Let us try determined plans. The work 
and understand how organising is divided into manageable 
is carried out with the help of an activities so that duplication 
example. can be avoided and the burden 

Suppose twelve students work for of work can be shared among 
the school library in the summer the employees.  
vacations. One afternoon they are  (ii) Departmentalisation: Once 
told to unload a shipment of new work has been divided into small 
releases, stock the bookshelves, and and manageable activities then 
then dispose of all waste (packaging, those activities  which are similar 
paper etc). If all the students decide in nature are grouped together. 
to do it in their own way, it will result Such sets facilitate specialisation. 
in mass confusion. However, if one This grouping process is 

Definition of Organising
Organising is the process of identifying and grouping the work to 
be performed, defining and delegating responsibility and authority, 
and establishing relationships for the purpose of enabling people to 
work most effectively together in accomplishing objectives. 

Louis Allen 
Organising is the process of defining and grouping the activities of the 
enterprise and establishing authority relationships among them.

Theo Haimman

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   111 08-08-2022   09:50:36



112 Business Studies

Think About It
Your school must have various societies for extra-curricular 
activities like the dramatics society, the quiz club, the economics 
society, the debating society and so on. Observe and list the way 
they have organised their activities using division of labour, chain of 
communication and the levels they have adopted for reporting on 
work. How far is this similar to the process you have read about?

called departmentalisation. The establishment of such clear 
Departments can be created relationships helps to create a 
using several criteria as a basis. hierarchal structure and helps 
Examples of some of the most in coordination amongst various 
popularly used basis are territory departments.
(north, south, west, etc.) and 
products (appliances, clothes, iMportance of organiSing
cosmetics etc).

 (iii) Assignment of duties: It is Performance of the organising 
necessary to define the work function can pave the way for a 
of different job positions and smooth transition of the enterprise 
accordingly allocate work in accordance with the dynamic 
to various employees. Once business environment. The 
departments have been formed, significance of the organising 
each of them is placed under function mainly arises from the fact 
the charge of an individual. that it helps in the survival and 
Jobs are then allocated to the growth of an enterprise and equips 
members of each department in it to meet various challenges. In 
accordance to their skills and order for any business enterprise to 
competencies. It is essential perform tasks and successfully meet 
for effective performance that a goals, the organising function must 
proper match is made between be properly performed. The following 
the nature of a job and the points highlight the crucial role that 
ability of an individual. The work organising plays in any business 
must be assigned to those who enterprise:
are best fitted to perform it well.  (i) Benefits of specialisation: 

 (iv) Establishing authority and Organising leads to a systematic 
reporting relationships: Merely allocation of jobs amongst the 
allocating work is not enough. work force. This reduces the 
Each individual should also know workload as well as enhances 
who he has to take orders from productivity because of the 
and to whom he is accountable. specific workers performing  a 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   112 08-08-2022   09:50:36



Organising 113

specific job on a regular basis. way for a smooth transition. 
Repetitive performance of a It also provides much needed 
particular task allows a worker stability to the enterprise as it 
to gain experience in that area can then continue to survive 
and leads to specialisation. and grow inspite of changes.

 (ii) Clarity in working relation­  (v) Effective administration: 
ships: The establishment of Organising provides a clear 
working relationships clarifies description of jobs and related 
lines of communication and duties. This helps to avoid confusion 
specifies who is to report to and duplication. Clarity in working 
whom.  This removes ambiguity relationships enables proper 
in transfer of information execution of work. Management 
and instructions. It helps in of an enterprise thereby becomes 
creating a hierarchical order easy and this brings effectiveness 
thereby enabling the fixation of in administration.
responsibility and specification  (vi) Development of personnel:
of the extent of authority to be Organising stimulates creativity 
exercised  by an individual. amongst the managers.  Effective 

 (iii) Optimum utilisation of delegation allows the managers 
resources: Organising leads to to reduce their workload  by 
the proper usage of all material, assigning routine jobs to their 
fin ancial and human resources. subordinates.  The  reduction in 
The proper assignment of jobs workload by delegation is not 
avoids overlapping of work and just necessary because of limited 
also makes possible the best capacity of an individual but also 
use of resources. Avoidance allows the manager to develop new 
of duplication of work helps methods and ways of performing 
in preventing confusion and tasks. It gives them the time to 
minimising the wastage of explore areas for growth and the 
resources and efforts. opportunity to innovate thereby 

 (iv) Adaptation to change: The strengthening the company’s 
process of organising allows competitive position.  Delegation 
a business enterprise to also develops in the subordinate 
accommodate changes in the the ability to deal effectively with 
business environment. It allows challenges and helps them to 
the organisation structure to be realise their full potential.
suitably modified and the revision  (vii) Expansion and growth: Organ­
of inter­relationships amongst ising helps in the growth  and 
managerial levels to pave the diversification of an enterprise 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   113 08-08-2022   09:50:36



114 Business Studies

Think About It
Organising leads to specialisation in work. A pitfall of this is that 
repetitive performance of the same job may lead to monotony, 
stress, boredom and absenteeism. What can managers do to 
improve the scenario?

by enabling it to deviate from an enterprise as those companies 
existing norms and taking up which do not change at all will close 
new challenges. down or cease to grow.

It allows a business enterprise to As an organisation grows, coordi­
add more job positions, departments nation becomes difficult due to the 
and even diversify their product emergence of new functions and 
lines. New geographical territories increase in structural hierarchies. 
can be added to current areas Thus, for an organisation to function 
of operation and this will help to smoothly and face environmental 
increase customer base, sales and changes, it becomes necessary to 
profit. pay attention to its structure.

Thus, organising is a process by Peter Drucker emphasises on the 
which the manager brings order out 
of chaos, removes conflict among importance of having an appropriate 

people over work or responsibility organisation structure when he 
sharing and creates an environment says, “organisation structure is an 
suitable for teamwork. indispensable means; and the wrong 

structure will seriously impair busi­
organiSation Structure ness performance and even destroy it.”
Organisation structure is the The organisation structure can 
outcome of the organising process. be defined as the framework within 
An effective structure will result which managerial and operating 
in increased profitability of the tasks are performed. It specifies the 
enterprise. The need for an adequate relationships between people, work 
organisation structure is felt by and resources. It allows correlation 
an enterprise whenever it grows in and coordination among human, 
size or complexity. It is only those physical  and financial resources  and 
enterprises which do not focus this enables a business enterprise 
on growth that can maintain a to accomplish desired goals. The 
particular structure for a long period organisation structure of a firm is 
of time. However, it is important to shown in an organisation chart.
understand that such stagnancy The span of management, to 
may prove to be detrimental to a large extent gives shape to the 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   114 08-08-2022   09:50:36



Organising 115

organisational structure. Span of sales and administration. Operations 
management refers to the number of include travel counsellor, reservation 
subordinates that can be effectively and ticketing and customer care. 
managed by a superior. This Sales include the Accounts executive. 
determines the levels of management Administration includes Book Keeper, 
in the structure. Cashier and utility personnel. 

A proper organisation structure is This division of work on the basis 
essential to ensure a smooth flow of of functions has resulted into an 
communication and better control organisational structure specifying the 
over the operations of a business line of authority and responsibility.
enterprise.

An organisation structure provides typeS of organiSation 
the framework which enables the StructureS
enterprise to function as an integrated 
unit by regulating and coordinating The type of structure adopted by an 
the responsibilities of individuals organisation will vary with the nature 
and departments. Let us try and and types of activities performed by 
understand this through an example. an organsation. The organisational 

For example: Sunita opened her own structure can be classified under two 
travel agency. The success of her travel categories which are as follows: 
agency depends on a harmonious  (i) Functional structure and 
relationship between the customer  (ii) Divisional structure
and the employees of the travel agency. 
In order to achieve this objective she Functional structure 
has divided the entire work of the Grouping of jobs of similar nature 
agency into three subheads based under functional and organising 
on the functions namely operations, these major functions as separate 

Functional Structure

Managing Director

Research and 
Human Resources Marketing Development Purchasing

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   115 08-08-2022   09:50:36



116 Business Studies

departments creates a functional Disadvantages: The functional 
structure. All departments report to structure has certain disadvantages 
a coordinating head. For example, in which an organisation must take 
a manufacturing concern division of into consideration before it adopts it. 
work into key functions will include Some of them are as follows:
production, purchase, marketing, (a)  A functional structure places less 
accounts and personnel. These emphasis on overall enterprise 
departments may be further divided objectives than the objectives 
into sections. Thus, a functional pursued by a functional head. 
structure is an organisational design Such practices may lead to 
that groups similar or related jobs functional empires wherein 
together. the importance of a particular 
Advantages: The functional structure function may be overemphasised. 
has many advantages to offer. Pursuing departmental interests 
Important among them are as follows: at the cost of organisational 
(a) A functional structure leads to interests can also hinder the 

occupational specialisation since interaction between two or more 
emphasis is placed on specific departments.

functions. This promotes efficiency (b)  It may lead to problems in 
coordination as information has to 

in utilisation of manpower as be exchanged across functionally 
employees perform similar tasks differentiated departments.
within a department and are able (c)  A conflict of interests may 
to improve performance. arise when the interests of two 

(b) It promotes control and or more departments are not 
coordination within a department compatible. For example, the 
because of similarity in the tasks sales department insisting on 
being performed. a customer friendly design may 

(c) It helps in increasing managerial cause difficulties in production. 
and operational efficiency  and Such dissension can prove to be 
this results in increased profit. harmful in terms of fulfillment 

(d) It leads to minimal duplication of of organisational interest. Inter­
effort which results in economies departmental conflicts can also 
of scale and this lowers cost. arise in the absence of  clear 

(e) It makes training of  employees separation of responsibility.
easier as the focus is only on a (d)  It may lead to inflexibility as 
limited range of  skills. people with same skills and 

(f) It ensures that different functions knowledge base may develop a 
get due attention. narrow perspective and thus, 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   116 08-08-2022   09:50:36



Organising 117

Think About It
Read newspapers regularly and try to identify the structures various 
business organisations being mentioned in the news have adopted. 
Have their structures led to improved and desired results in any 
way?

have difficulty in appreciating by Each unit has a divisional manager 
other point of view. Functional responsible for performance and 
heads do not get training for top who has authority over the unit. 
management positions because Generally, manpower is grouped 
they are unable to gather on the basis of different products 
experience in diverse areas. manufactured. Each division is 

Suitability: It is most suitable when multifunctional because within each 
the size of the organisation is large, has division functions like production, 
a diversified activities and operations marketing, finance, purchase, etc., 
require a high degree of specialisation. are performed together to achieve 

a common goal. Each division is 
Divisional Structure self­contained as it develops expertise 
Many large organisations with in all functions related to a product 
diversified activities have reorganised line.
themselves away from the simpler and In other words, within each division, 
basic functional structure towards the functional structure tends to be 
a divisional structure which is more adopted. However, functions may vary 
suited to their activities. This is across divisions in accordance with a 
particularly true of those enterprises particular product line. Further, each 
which have more than one category division works as a profit center where 
of products to offer. This is because the divisional head is responsible for 
although every organisation performs the profit or loss of his division. For 
a set of homogenous functions, as example, a large company may have 
it diversifies into varied product divisions like cosmetics, clothing, etc. 
categories, the need for a more evolved Advantages: The divisional structure 
structural design is felt to cope with offers many benefits. Prominent 
the emerging complexity. among these are as follows:

In a divisional structure, the (a) Product specialisation helps in the 
organisation structure comprises of development of varied skills in a 
separate business units or divisions. divisional head and this prepares 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   117 08-08-2022   09:50:36



118 Business Studies

Organisation Chart Managing Director
Showing Divisional and 
Functional Structure

Cosmetics Garments Footwear Skin care

Research and 
Human Resources Marketing Development Purchasing

him for higher positions. This is operations by merely adding 
because he gains experience in all another divisional head and staff 
functions related to a particular for the new product line.
product. Disadvantages: The divisional 

(b) Divisional heads are accountable structure has certain disadvantages. 
for profits, as revenues and costs Some of them are as follows:
related to different departments can (a) Conflict may arise among 
be easily identified and assigned to different divisions with reference 

them. This provides a proper basis to allocation of funds and further 
a particular division may seek to 

for performance measurement. It maximise its profits at the cost of 
also helps in fixation of responsibility other divisions.
in cases of poor performance of the (b) It may lead to increase in costs 
division and appropriate remedial since there may be a duplication 
action can be taken. of activities across products. 

(c) It promotes flexibility and initiative Providing each division with 
because each division functions as separate set of similar functions 
an autonomous unit which leads increases expenditure.
to faster decision making.  (c) It provides managers with the 

(d) It facilitates expansion and growth authority to supervise all activities 
as new divisions can be added related to a particular division. In 
without interrupting the existing course of time, such a manager 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   118 08-08-2022   09:50:36



Organising 119

Comparative view: Functional and Divisional Structure
Basis Functional Structure Divisional Structure

Formation Formation is based on Formation is based on product 
functions lines and is supported by 

functions.
Specialisation Functional specialisation. Product specialisation.
Responsibility Difficult to fix on a Easy to fix responsiblity for 

department. performance.
Managerial Difficult, as each Easier, autonomy as well as 
Development functional manager the chance to perform multiple 

has to report to the top functions helps in managerial 
management. development.

Cost Functions are not Duplication of resources in 
duplicated hence various departments, hence 
economical costly.

Coordination Difficult for a multi­ Easy, because all functions 
product company. related to a particular 

product are integrated in one 
department.

may gain power and in a bid Thus, it can be said that business 
to assert his independence may operates in a dynamic environment 
ignore organisational  interests. and those enterprises which fail 

Suitability: Divisional structure to adapt to change are unable to 
is suitable for those business survive. Hence, management must 
enterprises where a large variety of continuously review its plans and 

pro ducts are manufactured using objectives and accordingly the 
organisation structure of the enterprise 

diffe rent productive resources. When 
should also be subjected to periodic 

an organisation grows and needs to review to determine if modification is 
add more employees, create more required. An organisation structure, 
depar tments and introduce new at all times should contribute towards 
levels of management, it will decide the achievement of the enterprise’s 
to adopt a divisional structure. Table objectives and should provide scope 
1 provides a comparison of functional for initiative so that contribution 
and divisional structure to provide of personnel can be maximum and 
further clarity on the topic. effective.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   119 08-08-2022   09:50:36



120 Business Studies

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   120 08-08-2022   09:50:36

Organisation Chart of ONGC
C & MD

l  Company Secretary
l	Corporate Affairs MD, ONGC Videsh Ltd.
l	Chief Vigilance Officer

Director Director Director Director Director ector
Offshore Onshore Exploration HR Tech & Field Dir

ervices Finance ... To be filled ...
S

Mumbai Supply Ahmedabad Western HRD Chief Drill. Internal Chief Infocom
High Bases Offshore IDTServices Audit

Ankleshwar Western Functional I
Bassein & Commer- Chief Planning 
Satellite Uran Plant Onshore HR Planning Drilling OGPT

Mehsana Projects & Cap. 
IEOT cial

Assam & Cementing Budget

Heera & Hazira Assam Assam-Arakan Employee 
Relations Mud Explor. & Perfor- Chief MM

Neelam Plant Cauvery Dev Tech mance 
Karaikal ONGC Chief Well mgmt & Chief Business 

Offshore (Cauvery) KG-PG Academy Services Bench- Devp., JVs & 
PSC - JV marking Marketing

Rajamundhry GVK (Frontier) Security Workover
(KG) KDIMPE Legal WSS Chief SHE

Tripura Regional IPSEM
Labs Medical Well 

Completion Chief EM. 
IRS Corporate & Drilling

Comm Technical Audit 
GEOPIC Geophysical & QA

Services Chief Logging Mainte- Chief 
Regional Geo- CBMMBP nance Engineering

physical Services Design
Exploration Head, Regional 
Directorate Officer

Works
EX COM

Adapted from www.ongc.com/archives1



Organising 121

Structural Transformation at ONGC
Since its inception, ONGC has been instrumental in transforming the country’s limited 
upstream sector into a large viable playing field, with its activities spread throughout India and 
significantly in overseas territories.

The 1990s had begun on a grim note for ONGC. It took almost a decade for the Corporation 
to sort things out in most uncertain of times.

Among many problems, the Corporation was also suffering from the organisational atrophy.
In order to survive ONGC sought help from Mc Kinsey.

Mc Kinsey’s mandate was to evolve an organisational structure that was far more 
responsive to its business needs than that based on business groups. The ONGC  system run 
by functional heads often meant delays exceeding a year in matters requiring urgent decisions 
on fields. Also, since responsibilities were shared at production platforms between different 
business groups, the system degenerated into wrangling over responsibilities. Similarly, group 
loyalties often took precedence over the requirements of tasks. But, most importantly, it 
was found that the performance evaluation criteria based on business group yardstick were 
completely at loggerheads with requirements on fields. Mc Kinsey recommended an asset-
based approach with clearly-defined responsibilities in its presentation titled ‘Organisation 
Transformation Project’

Though Mc Kinsey recommendations were broadly accepted, coordination issues 
concerning commonly-shared services needed to be sorted out. 

Finally, the first control over all service personnel working with asset teams was vested 
in asset managers, on grounds that being responsible for the performance of their strategic 
business units they must rightfully exercise control over all personnel working with them. 
Even procurement powers were devolved. Finally, a new structure made up of 14 assets and 
11 centralised services was rolled out .

Do It Yourself
You have seen the structure of ONGC as an illustration in this text. 
Browse the websites of other business organisations and study their 
organisational chart. Try to identify the structure they are using.

forMal and inforMal processes have to be laid down. This is 
done through the formal organisation.

organiSation Formal organisation refers to 
In all organisations, employees are the organisation structure which 
guided by rules and procedures. is designed by the management 
To enable smooth functioning of to accomplish a particular task. It 
the enterprise, job description and specifies clearly the boundaries of 
rules and procedures related to work authority and responsibility and 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   121 08-08-2022   09:50:36



122 Business Studies

there is a systematic coordination Advantages: Formal organisation 
among the various activities to offers many advantages. Some of the 
achieve organisational goals. important ones are:

The structure in a formal organ­ (a) It is easier to fix responsibility 
isation can be functional or divis­ since mutual relationships are 
ional. The formal organisation can clearly defined.
be better understood by a study of its (b) There is no ambiguity in the role 
features which are as follows: that each member has to play 
(a) It specifies the relationships as duties are specified. This also 

among various job positions helps in avoiding duplication of 
and the nature of their inter­ effort.
relationship. This clarifies who (c) Unity of command is maintained 
has to report to whom. through an established chain of 

(b) It is a means to achieve the command.
objectives specified in the (d) It leads to effective accomplish­
plans, as it lays down rules and ment of goals by providing a 
procedures essential for their framework for the operations to 
achievement. be performed and ensuring that 

(c) Efforts of various departments each employee knows the role he 
are coordinated, interlinked and has to play.
integrated through the formal (e) It provides stability to the organ­
organisation. isation. This is because behaviour 

(d) It is deliberately designed by the of employees can be fairly pre­
top management to facilitate dicted since there are specific 
the smooth functioning of the rules to guide them. 
organisation. Limitations: The formal organisation 

(e) It places more emphasis on suffers from the following limitations:
work to be performed than (a) The formal communication may 
interpersonal relationships lead to procedural delays as the 
among the employees. established chain of command has 

Formal Organisation
The formal organisation is a system of well-defined jobs, each bearing 
a definite measure of authority, responsibility and accountability.

Louis Allen 
Formal organisation is a system of consciously coordinated activities 
of two or more persons toward a  common objective.

Chester  Barnand

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   122 08-08-2022   09:50:36



Organising 123

to be followed which increases the those who take part in cricket matches 
time taken for decision making. on Sundays, meet in the cafeteria for 

(b) Poor organisation practices may coffee, are interested in dramatics, 
not provide adequate recognition etc. Informal organisation has no 
to creative talent, since it does not written rules, is fluid in form and 
allow any deviations from rigidly scope and does not have fixed lines of 
laid down polices. communication. The Table in the next 

(c) It is difficult to understand page compares informal organisation 
all human relationships in an with the formal organisation to provide 
enterprise as it places more better understanding of both types.
emphasis on structure and work. Informal organisation can be 
Hence, the formal organisation better understood with the help of 
does not provide a complete picture the following features:
of how an organisation works. (a) An informal organisation 

originates from within the formal 
inforMal organiSation orga nisation as a result of personal 
Interaction among people at work interaction among employees.
gives rise to a ‘network of social (b) The standards of behaviour 
relationships among employees’ called evolve from group norms rather 
the informal organisation. than officially laid down rules 

and regulations.
Informal organisation emerges (c) Independent channels of 

from within the formal organisation communication without specified 
when people interact beyond their direction of flow of information 
officially defined roles. When people are developed by group members.
have frequent contacts they cannot (d) It emerges spontaneously and is 
be forced into a rigid formal structure. not deliberately created by the 
Rather, based on their interaction and management.
friendship they tend to form groups (e) It has no definite strucure or form 
which show conformity in terms of because it is a complex network 
interest. Examples of such groups of social relationships among 
formed with common interest may be members.

Informal Organisation
An informal organisation is an aggregate of interpersonal relationships without any 
conscious purpose but which may contribute to joint results.

Chester Barnand
Informal organisation is a network of personal and social relations not established or required 
by the formal organisation but arising spontaneously as people associate with one another.

Keith Davis

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   123 08-08-2022   09:50:36



124 Business Studies

Advantages: The informal organisation the formal organisation. For example, 
offers many benefits. Important among employees reactions towards plans 
them are given below: and policies can be tested through 
(a) Prescribed lines of communication the informal network.

are not followed. Thus, the Disadvantages: The informal 
informal organisation leads to organisation has certain disadvantages. 
faster spread of information as Some of them are as follows:
well as quick feedback. (a) When an informal organisation 

spreads rumours, it becomes 
(b) It helps to fulfill the social needs a destructive force and goes 

of the members and allows against the interest of the formal 
them to find like minded people. organisation.
This enhances their job satisfaction (b) The management may not be 
since it gives them a sense of successful in implementing chan­
belongingness in the organisation. ges if the informal organisation 

(c) It contributes towards fulfillment opposes them. Such resistance 
of organisational objectives by to change may delay or restrict 
compensating for inadequacies in growth.

 Formal and informal organisation: A Comparative view

Basis Formal organisation Informal organisation
Network of social 

Structure of authority 
relationships arising out 

Meaning relationships created by the 
of interaction among 

management
employees

Arises as a result of Arises as a result of social 
Origin

company rules and policies interaction
Arises by virtue of position Arises out of personal 

Authority
in management qualities

There is no set behaviour 
Behavior It is directed by rules

pattern
Flow of communication 

Communication takes place is not through a planned 
Flow of Communication

through the scalar chain route. It can take place in 
any direction

Nature Rigid Flexible
Leaders may or may not 

Leadership Managers are leaders. be managers. They are 
chosen by the group.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   124 08-08-2022   09:50:37



Organising 125

(c) It pressurises members to conform desires to meet the organisational 
to group expectations. This can goals, focus on objectives and ensure 
be harmful to the organisation if that all work is accomplished, he 
the norms set by the group are must delegate authority.
against organisational interests. Delegation refers to the downward 

Informal organisation cannot transfer of  authority from a superior 
be altogether eliminated. Thus, to a subordinate. It is a pre­requisite 
it would be in the best interest of to the efficient functioning of an 
the organisation if the existence of organisation because it enables 
such groups is recognised and the a manager to use his time on high 
roles that their members play are priority activities. It also satisfies the 
identified. The knowledge of such subordinate’s need for recognition 
groups can be used to gather their and provides them with opportunities 
support and consequently lead to to develop and exercise initiative.
improved organisational performance. Delegation helps a manager to 

extend his area of operations as 
Such groups can also provide useful without it, his activities would be 
communication channels. Instead of restricted to only what he himself 
confronting them, the management can do. However, delegation does 
should skillfully take advantage of both not mean abdication. The manager 
the formal and informal organisation shall still be accountable for the 
so that work continues smoothly. performance of the assigned tasks.

d Moreover, the authority granted to a 
elegation subordinate can be taken back and 

A manager, no matter how capable he redelegated to another person. Thus, 
is, cannot manage to do every task on irrespective of the extent of delegated 
his own. The volume of work makes authority ,the manager  shall still  be 
it impractical for him to handle it all accountable to the same extent as 
by himself. As a consequence, if he before delegation.

Delegation
Delegation is the process a manager follows in dividing the work 
assigned to him so that he performs that part which only he because  
of his unique organisational placement, can perform  effectively and 
so that he can get others to help with what remains.

Louis Allen
Delegation of authority merely means the granting of authority to 
subordinates to operate within prescribed limits.

Theo Haimman

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   125 08-08-2022   09:50:37



126 Business Studies

Elements of Delegation established scalar chain which 
links the various job positions 

According to Louis Allen, delegation is and levels of an organisation. 
the entrustment of responsibility and Authority also refers to the right 
authority to another and the creation to take decisions inherent in a 
of accountability for performance. managerial position to tell people 

A detailed analysis of Louis Allen’s what to do and expect them to 
definition brings to light the following do it.  
essential elements of delegation: In the formal organisation authority 
 (i) Authority: Authority refers to originates by virtue of an individual’s 

the right of an individual to position and the extent of authority 
command his subordinates and is highest at the top management 
to take action within the scope levels and reduces successively as we 
of his position. The concept go down the corporate ladder. Thus, 
of authority arises from the authority flows from top to bottom, 

No delegation leads to delays in 
decision-making

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   126 08-08-2022   09:50:39



Organising 127

Creation of accountability for 
performance

i.e., the superior has authority over It must be noted that authority 
the subordinate. is restricted by laws and the rules 

Authority relationships helps to and regulation of the organisation, 
maintain order in the organisation which limit its scope. However, as 
by giving the managers the right to we go higher up in the management 
exact obedience and give directions hierarchy, the scope of authority 

to the workforce under them. increases.
 (ii) Responsibility: Responsibility is 

Authority determines the superior the obligation of a subor­dinate 
subordinate relationship wherein the to properly perform the assigned 
superior communicates his decision duty. It arises from a superior–
to the subordinate, expecting subordinate relationship because 
compliance from him and the the subor­dinate is bound to 
subordinate executes the decision perform the duty assigned to 
as per the guidelines of the superior. him by his superior. Thus, 
The extent to which a superior can responsibility flows upwards, 
exact compliance also depends on i.e., a subordinate will always 
the personality of the superior. be responsible to his superior.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   127 08-08-2022   09:50:40



128 Business Studies

An important consideration to cannot deny accountability. It cannot 
be kept in view with respect to be delegated and flows upwards, i.e., a 
both authority and responsibility subordinate will be accountable to a 
is that when an employee is given superior for satisfactory performance 
responsibility for a job he must also of work. It indicates that the manager 
be given the degree of authority has to ensure the proper discharge 
necessary to carry it out. Thus, for of duties by his subordinates. It is 
effective delegation the authority generally enforced through regular 
granted must be commensurate feedback on the extent of work 
with the assigned responsibility. accomplished. The subordinate will be 
If authority granted is more than expected to explain the consequences 
responsibility, it may lead to misuse of his actions or omissions. 
of authority, and if responsibility In conclusion, it can be stated that 
assigned is more than authority it while authority is delegated, responsi­
may make a person ineffective. bility is assumed, accountability is 
 (iii) Accountability: Delegation of imposed. Responsibility is derived 

from authority and accountability is 
authority, undoubtedly empowers derived from responsibility. 
an employee to act for his superior 
but the superior would still be iMportance of delegation
accountable for the outcome: Delegation ensures that the subordi­

Accountability implies being nates perform tasks on behalf of the 
answerable for the final outcome. manager thereby reducing his 
Once authority has been delegated workload and providing him with more 
and responsibility accepted, one time to concentrate on important 

 Overview of the elements of delegation
Basis Authority Responsibility Accountability

Meaning Right to command. Obligation to Answerability for 
perform an assigned outcome of the 
task. assigned task.

Delegation Can be delegated. Cannot be entirely Cannot be delegated 
delegated. at all.

Origin Arises from formal Arises from Arises from 
position . delegated authority. responsibility.

Flow Flows downward Flows upward from Flows upward from 
from superior to subordinate to subordinate to 
subordinate. superior. superior

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   128 08-08-2022   09:50:40



Organising 129

matters. Effective delegation leads to on the part of the subordinate. 
the following benefits: Responsibility for work builds 
 (i) Effective management: By the self­esteem of an employee 

empowering the employees, the and improves his confidence. 
managers are able to function He feels encouraged and tries 
more efficiently as they get more to improve his performance 
time to concentrate on  important further.
matters. Freedom from doing  (iv) Facilitation of growth: Delegation 
routine work provides them with helps in the expansion of an 
opportunities to excel in new organisation by providing a ready 
areas. workforce to take up leading 

 (ii) Employee development: As a positions in new ventures. Trained 
result of delegation, employees and experienced employees are 
get more opportunitiecs to utilise able to play significant roles in 
their talent and this may give the launch of new projects by 
rise to latent abilities in them. replicating the work ethos they 
It allows them to develop those have absorbed from existing units, 
skills which will enable them in the newly set up branches.
to perform complex tasks and  (v) Basis of management hier­
assume those responsibilities archy: Delegation of authority 
which will improve their career establishes superior­subordinate 
prospects. It makes them relationships, which are the basis 
better leaders and decision of hierarchy of management. It is 
makers. Thus, delegation helps the degree and flow of authority 
by preparing better future which determines who has to 
managers. Delegation empowers report to whom. The extent of 
the employees by providing delegated authority also decides 
them with the chance to use 
their skills, gain experience and the power that each job position 
develop themselves for higher enjoys in the organisation.
positions.  (vi) Better coordination: The 

 (iii) Motivation of employees: elements of delegation, namely 
Delegation helps in developing authority, responsibility and 
the talents of the employees. It accountability help to define the 
also has psychological benefits. powers, duties and answerability 
When a superior entrusts a related to the various positions 
subordinate with a task, it in an organisation. This helps to 
is not merely the sharing of avoid overlapping of duties and 
work but involves trust on the duplication of effort as it gives a 
superior’s part and commitment clear picture of the work being 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   129 08-08-2022   09:50:40



130 Business Studies

done at various levels. Such clarity of the organisation. Decision making 
in reporting relationships help authority is shared with lower levels 
in developing and maintaining and is consequently placed nearest 
effective coordination amongst to the points of action. In other words 
the departments, levels and decision making authority is pushed 
functions of management. down the chain of command.

Thus, delegation is a key element When decisions taken by the 
in effective organising. lower levels are numerous as well 

as important an organisation can be 
decentraliSation regarded as greatly decentralised.
In many organisations the top Centralisation and 
management  plays an active role Decentralisation
in taking all decisions while there 
are others in which this power is Centralisation and decentralisation 

given to even the lower levels of are relative terms, as seen from the 
existing status of various business 

management. Those organisations 
enterprises.

in which decision making authority 
An organisation is centralised 

lies with the top management are when decision­making authority 
termed as  centralised organisations is retained by higher management 
whereas those in which such levels whereas it is decentralised 
authority is shared with lower levels when such authority is delegated.
are decentralised organisations. Complete centralisation would 

Decentralisation explains the imply concentration of all decision 
manner in which decision making making functions at the apex of 
responsibilities are divided among the management hierarchy. Such a 
hierarchical levels. Put simply, scenario would obviate the need for a 
decentralisation refers to delegation management hierarchy. On the other 
of authority throughout all the levels hand, complete decentralisation 

Decentralisation
Decentralisation refers to systematic effort to delegate to the 
lowest level all authority except that which can be exercised at 
central points.

Louis Allen
Everything which goes to increase the importance of a subordinate’s 
role is decentralisation, everything that goes to reduce it is 
centralisation.

Henri Fayol

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   130 08-08-2022   09:50:40



Organising 131

would imply the delegation of all however, needs to carefully select 
decision making functions to the those decisions which will be pushed 
lower level of the hierarchy and this down to lower levels and those that will 
would obviate the need for higher be retained for higher levels. Table 4 
managerial positions. Both the provides a comparative look between 
scenarios are unrealistic. delegation and decentralisation.

An organisation can never be Decentralisation is a fundamental 
completely centralised or decent­ step and its importance can be 
ralised. As it grows in size and comp­ understood from the following points:
lexity , there is a tendency to move  (i) Develops initiative among 
towards decentralised decision subordinates: Decentralisation 
making. This is because in large helps to promote self­reliance 
organisations those employees who and confidence amongst the 
are directly and closely involved with subordinates. This is because 
certain operations tend to have more when lower managerial levels are 
knowledge about them than the top given freedom to take their own 
management which may only be decisions they learn to depend 
indirectly associated with individual on their own judgment. It also 
operations. keeps them in a state wherein 

Hence, there is a need for a they are constantly challenged 
balance between these co­existing and have to develop solutions 
forces. Thus, it can be said that every for the various problems they 
organisation will be characterised encounter. A decentralisation 
by both centralisation and policy helps to identify those 
decentralisation. executives who have the 

necessary potential to become 
iMportance dynamic leaders.
Decentralisation is much more than a  (ii) Develops managerial talent 
mere transfer of authority to the lower for the future: Formal training 
levels of management hierarchy. It is plays an important part in 
a philosophy that implies selective equipping subordinates with 
dispersal of authority because it skills that help them rise in 
propagates the belief that people are the organisation but equally 
competent, capable and resourceful. important is the experience 
They can assume the responsibility gained by handling assignments 
for the effective implementation of independently. Decentralisation 
their decisions. Thus this philosophy gives them a chance to prove 
recognises the decision maker’s need their abilities and creates a 
for autonomy. The management, reservoir of qualified manpower 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   131 08-08-2022   09:50:40



132 Business Studies

who can be considered to fill exercised by a superior over the 
up more challenging positions activities of a subordinate because 
through promotions. It also helps they are given the freedom to 
to identify those who may not be act and decide albeit within the 
successful in assuming greater limits set by the superior. Also, 
responsibility. Thus, it is a means personal supervision is generally 
of management education as well replaced by other forms of control 
as an opportunity for trained such as return on investment 
manpower to use its talent in real etc. Decentralisation also leaves 
life situations. the top management with more 

 (iii) Quick decision making: The time which they can devote to 
management hierarchy can important policy decisions rather 
be looked upon as a chain of than occupying their time with 
communication. In centralised both policy as well as operational 
organisation because every decisions. In  fact decentralisation 
decision is taken by the top is greatest when checking required 
management the flow of on decisions taken by lower levels 
information is slow as it has to of management is least.
traverse many levels. Response  (v) Facilitates growth: Decentrali­
also takes time. This reduces the sation awards greater autonomy to 
speed of decision making and the lower levels of management as 
makes it difficult for an enterprise well as divisional or departmental 
to adapt to dynamic operating heads. This allows them to 
conditions. In a decentralised function in a manner best suited 
organisation, however ,since to their department and fosters 
decisions are taken at levels which a sense of competition amongst 
are nearest to the points of action the departments. Consequently, 
and there is no requirement for with each department doing its 
approval from many levels, the best in a bid to outdo the other, the 
process is much faster. There are productivity levels increase and 
also less chances of information the organisation is able to generate 
getting distorted because it more returns which can be used 
doesn’t have to go through long for expansion purposes.
channels.  (vi) Better control: Decentralisation 

 (iv) Relief to top management: makes it possible to evaluate 
Decentralisation diminishes the performance at each level and the 
amount of direct supervision departments can be individually 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   132 08-08-2022   09:50:40



Organising 133

held accountable for their mation system. Decentralisation 
results. The extent of achievement compels the management 
of organisational objectives as to innovative performance 
well as the contribution of each measur ement systems.
department in meeting the overall As a conclusion, it must be 
objectives can be ascertained. noted that in spite of its benefits 
Feedback from all levels helps to decentralisation should be applied 
analyse variances and improve with caution as it can lead to 
operations. In decentralisation, organisational disintegration if the 
one of the challenges is the departments start to operate on their 
accountability  of performance. own guidelines which may be contrary 
In response to this challenge, to the interest of the organisation. 
better control systems are Decentralisation must always be 
being evolved such as the balance balanced with centralisation in areas 
score card and management infor­ of major policy decisions.

Decentralisation : A Strength

The McNeil name has been associated with the manufacturing and sale of pharmaceutical 
products since 1879, when Robert McNeil opened his first retail drug outlet in Pennsylvania. 
Growing as a producer of prescription pharmaceuticals, McNeil Laboratories, Inc. was 
incorporated in the U.S. in 1933, and became a member of the Johnson & Johnson family of 
companies in 1959. Mcneil Consumer Healthcare began operations in Canada in an existing 
administrative Johnson & Johnson facility in Guelph, Ontario in 1980.

McNeil Consumer Healthcare (nonprescription pharmaceutical products) in Guelph, 
Ontario is member of the Johnson & Johnson family of companies in Canada.

An important difference between Johnson & Johnson and most other companies — is the 
concept of decentralised management. Instead of operating as one large multi-billion dollar 
corporation, Johnson & Johnson is operated as 190 smaller companies, each focused on a 
specific medical or product franchise and/or geographic area, with each affiliate generating 
multiple options for growth. Through decentralisation we combine the advantages of being 
big with the agility and focus of smaller firms. Decentralisation enables each company 
to sty close to its customer, maintain short lines of communication with customers and 
employees, and accelerate the development of talent. The Johnson & Johnson - Merck 
Consumer Pharmaceuticals company also operates from our Woodlawn Road facility in 
Guelph.

http://www.mcneilcanada.com/eng/eco07pgl.shtm

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   133 08-08-2022   09:50:40



134 Business Studies

Think About It
If you were a manager, would you decentralise, knowing that it 
would mean dispersal of decision making authority?

Delegation and Decentralisation: A Comparative view
Basis Delegation Decentralisation

Nature Delegation is a compulsory Decentralisation is an optional 
act because no individual can policy decision. It is done 
perform all tasks on his own. at the discretion of the top 

management.
Freedom of action More control by superiors Less control over executives 

hence less freedom to take hence greater freedom of 
own decisions. action.

Status It is a process followed to It is the result of the 
share tasks. policy decision of the top 

management.
Scope It has narrow scope as it is It has wide scope as it implies 

limited to superior and his extension of delegation to the 
immediate subordinate. lowest level of management.

Purpose To lessen the burden of the To increase the role of 
manager. the subordinates in the 

organisation by giving them 
more autonomy.

Key Terms

Organising  Organisational structure
Departmentalisation  Delegation  Authority
Responsibility  Accountability  Functional structure
Divisional structure  Formal organisation
Informal organisation  Span of management
Centralisation  Decentralisation

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   134 08-08-2022   09:50:41



Organising 135

Summary

Organising is the process of defining and grouping activities and 
establishing authority relationships among them.
Process: the process of organising consists of the following steps:

 (a) Identification and division of work
 (b) Departmentalisation
 (c) Assignment of Duties
 (d) Establishing reporting relationships

Importance: Organising is considered important because it leads 
to division of work, clarity in reporting relationships, optimum 
utilization of resources, growth, better administration and greater 
creativity.
Organisational structure is the framework within which managerial 
and operating tasks are performed. It can be functional or divisional. 
Span of management is the number of subordinates under a 
superior.
Functional structure groups activities on the basis of functions. 
The advantages of such a structure are specialisation, better 
control, managerial efficiency and ease in training employees. The 
disadvantages are functional empires, conflict of interest, inflexibility, 
and restriction in managerial development.
Divisional structure groups activities on the basis of products. 
The advantages are integration, product specialisation, greater 
accountability, flexibility, better coordination and more initiative. 
The disadvantages are departmental conflicts, costly process, 
ignoring of organisational interests, increase in requirements of 
general managers. 
Formal organisation is designed by the management to achieve 
organisational goals. Its advantages are fixation of responsibility, 
clarity of roles, unity of command and effective accomplishment 
of goals. Its disadvantages are procedural delays, inadequate 
recognition of creativity, limited in scope. 
Informal organisation arises out of interaction amongst people 
at work. Its advantages are speed, fulfillment of social needs, fills 
inadequacies of formal structure. Its disadvantages are:  disruptive 
force, resistance to change and priority to group interests. 
Delegation is the transfer of authority from superior to subordinate. 
It has three elements: Authority, Responsibility and Accountability. 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   135 08-08-2022   09:50:41



136 Business Studies

Importance of delegation is that it helps in effective management, 
employee development, motivation, growth and coordination.
Decentralisation is delegation of authority throughout the 
organisation.
Importance of decentralisation is that it helps in development of 
managerial talent, quick decision making reducing burden on top 
management, development of initiative, growth and better control.

Exercises

Very Short Answer Type:
1. Identify the network of social relationships which arises 

spontaneously due to interaction at work.
2. What does the term ‘Span of management’ refer to?
3. State any two circumstances under which the functional 

structure will prove to be an appropriate choice.
4. Draw a diagram depicting a functional structure.
5. company has its registered office in Delhi, manufacturing 

unit at Gurgaon and marketing and sales department at 
Faridabad. The company manufactures the consumer 
products. Which type of organisational structure should it 
adopt to achieve its target?

Short Answer Type:
1. What are the steps in the process of organising?
2. Discuss the elements of delegation.
3. How does informal organisation support the formal 

organisation?
4. Can a large sized organisation be totally centralised of 

decentralised? Give your opinion.
5. Decentralisation is extending delegation to the lowest level.

Comment.
6. Neha runs a factory wherein she manufactures shoes. The 

business has been doing well and she intends to expand by 
diversifying into leather bags as well as western formal wear 
thereby making her company a complete provider of corporate 
wear. This will enable her to market her business unit as the 
one stop for working women. Which type of structure would 
you recommend for her expanded organisation and why?

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   136 08-08-2022   09:50:41



Organising 137

7. The production manager asked the foreman to achieve a target 
production of 200 units per day, but he doesn’t give him the 
authority to requisition tools and materials from the stores 
department. Can the production manager blame the foreman 
if he is not able to achieve the desired target? Give reasons.

Long Answer Type
1. Why delegation is considered essential for effective organising?
2. What is a divisional structure? Discuss its advantages and 

limitations. 
3. Decentralisation is an optional policy. Explain why an 

organisation would choose to be decentralised.
4. Distinguish between centralisation and decentralisation.
5. How is a functional structure different from a divisional 

structure?
6. A company, which manufactures a popular brand of toys, has 

been enjoying good market reputation. It has a functional 
organisational structure with separate departments for 
Production, Marketing, Finance, Human Resources and 
Research and Development. Lately to use its brand name and 
also to cash on to new business opportunities it is thinking to 
diversify into manufacture of new range of electronic toys for 
which a new market is emerging. Which organisation structure 
should be adopted in this situation? Give concrete reasons 
with regard to benefits the company will derive from the steps 
it should take.

7. A company manufacturing sewing machines set up in 1945 by 
the British promoters follows formal organisation culture in 
totality. It is facing lot of problems in delays in decision making. 
As the result it is not able to adapt to changing business 
environment. The work force is also not motivated since they 
cannot vent their grievances except through formal channels, 
which involve red tape. Employee turnover is high. Its market 
share is also declining due to changed circumstances and 
business environment. You are to advise the company with 
regard to change it should bring about in its organisation 
structure to overcome the problems faced by it. Give reasons 
in terms of benefits it will derive from the changes suggested 
by you. 

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   137 08-08-2022   09:50:41



138 Business Studies

8. A company X limited manufacturing cosmetics, which has 
enjoyed a pre­eminent position in business, has grown in 
size. Its business was very good till 1991. But after that, 
new liberalised environment has seen entry of many MNC’s 
in the sector. With the result the market share of X limited 
has declined. The company had followed a very centralised 
business model with Directors and divisional heads making 
even minor decisions. Before 1991 this business model had 
served the company very well as consumers had no choice. 
But now the company is under pressure to reform. What 
organisation structure changes should the company bring 
about in order to retain its market share? How will the changes 
suggested by you help the firm? Keep in mind that the sector 
in which the company is FMCG.

Reprint 2024-25

Ch_05.indd   138 08-08-2022   09:50:41