chapter 
10

markeTing

Learning Objectives Where Do Companies Do Their Business?
In the Markets or in the Society?

After studying this chapter, It is an undisputed fact that a company’s survival 
you should be able to: does not depend upon its consumers alone, but a 

diverse set of stakeholders like the government, 
¾ explain the meaning of religious leaders, social activists, NGOs, media, 

‘marketing’; etc. Hence, earning the satisfaction of these 
segments is also as imperative as they add to the 

¾ distinguish between power of the brand by word of mouth.
‘ m a r k e t i n g ’  a n d The social concern adds to the strength of the 
‘selling’; brand. Corporates that embraced the deepest 

social values, have been successful in building 
¾ l is t  out important powerful brand, and, eventually, robust customer 

functions of marketing; relationship. The area of corporate social justice 
fall under two broad categories. The issues such 

¾ examine the role of as the nutrition of children, child care, old-age 
market ing  in the homes, amelioration of hunger, offering aid to 
development of  an those affected by natural calamities, etc. needing 
economy in a firm, instant attention with humanitarian perspective, 
to the society and to comes under the first category.
consumers; The issues that contribute to making society a 

pleasant place to live in the long run, may be grouped 
¾ explain the elements of under the second category. The issues which come 

marketing-mix; under this category are health awareness and aid, 
education, environmental protection, women’s 

¾ classify products into employment and empowerment, preventing unjust 
different categories; discriminations (on the basis of caste, community, 

religion, ethnicity, race, and sex), eradication 
¾ analyse the factors of poverty through employment, preservation 

affecting price of a of culture, values, and ethics, contribution to 
product; research, etc.

Procter and Gamble’s (P&G) philosophy is that it 
¾ l i s t  out  the types should lead the industry in implementing a global 

o f  c h a n n e l s  o f environmental programme. P&G is one of the 
distribution; and first companies in the world to actively study the 

influence of consumer products on the environment 
¾ expla in  the  major and introduce concentrated products, recycled 

tools of promotion, viz. plastic bottles, and refill packages to the industry. 

advertising, personal P&G contributes to sustainable development 
and addresses environmental and social issues 

selling, sales promotion connected with its products and services.
and publicity.

Source: Adapted from ‘Effective Executive’

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   242 10-08-2022   10:04:27



MArkeTING

243

The term marketing has been described pricing are required. All these activities 
by different people in different ways. are referred to as marketing activities.
Some people believe that marketing is Thus, ‘merchandising’, ‘selling’ and 
same as ‘shopping’. Whenever they go distribution are all parts of a large 
out for shopping of certain products or number of activities undertaken by 
services, they describe it as marketing. a firm, which are collectively called 
There are some other people who marketing.
confuse marketing with ‘selling’ and It may be noted here that marketing 
feel that marketing activity starts is not merely a post- production 
after a product or service has been activity. It includes many activities 
produced. Some people describe it to that are performed even before goods 
mean ‘merchandising’ or designing a are actually produced, and continue 
product. All these descriptions may be even after the goods have been 
partly correct but marketing is a much sold. For example, activities such 
broader concept, which is discussed as identification of customer needs, 
as follows: collection of information for developing 

Traditionally, marketing has been the product, designing suitable product 
described in terms of its functions or package and giving it a brand name are 
activities. In this respect, marketing performed before commencement of 
has been referred to as performance of the actual production. Similarly, many 
business activities that direct the flow follow up activities are required for 
of goods and services from producers maintaining good customer relations 
to consumers. for procuring repeat sale.

As  we  know,  mos t  o f  the In modern times, emphasis is placed 
manufacturing firms do not produce on describing marketing as a social 
goods for their own consumption process. It is a process whereby people 
but for the consumption or use exchange goods and services for money 
by others.  Therefore,  to move or for something of value to them. Taking 
the goods and services from the the social perspective, Phillip kolter has 
producer to consumers, a number of defined marketing as, “a social process 
activities, such as product designing by which individual groups obtain what 
or  merchandis ing,  packaging, they need and want through creating 
warehous ing ,  t ranspor ta t ion , offerings and freely exchanging products 
branding, selling, advertising and and services of value with others”.

“Business is not financial science, it’s about trading, buying and selling. It’s about 
creating a product or service so good that people will pay for it.”

— anta roddick 

“Marketing takes a day to learn. Unfortunately it takes time to master.”
         — Philip Kotler

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   243 10-08-2022   10:04:27



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

244

Understanding Market
In the traditional sense, the term ‘market’ refers to the place where buyers and sellers 
gather to enter into transactions involving the exchange of goods and services. It is 
in this sense that this term is being used in day to day language, even today. The 
other ways in which this term is being used is in the context of a product market 
(cotton market, gold or share market), geographic market (national and international 
market), type of buyers (consumer market and industrial market) and the quantity 
of goods transacted (retail market and wholesale market).

But in modern marketing sense, the term market has a broader meaning. It refers 
to a set of actual and potential buyers of a product or service. For example, when a 
fashion designer designs a new dress and offers it for exchange, all the people who 
are willing to buy and offer some value for it can be stated to be the market for that 
dress. Similarly, market for fans or bicycles or electric bulbs or shampoos refers to 
all the actual and potential buyers for these products.

Thus, marketing is a social process Needs are basic to human beings 
where in people interact with others, and do not pertain to a particular 
in order to persuade them to act in product. Wants, on the other hand, 
a particular way, say to purchase are culturally defined objects that are 
a product or a service, rather than potential satisfiers of needs. In other 
forcing them to do so. A careful analysis words, human needs shaped by such 
of the definition shows the following factors as culture, personality and 
important features of marketing: religion are called wants. A basic need 
1. needs and Wants: The process for food, for example, may take various 
of marketing helps individuals and forms such as want for dosa and rice 
groups in obtaining what they need for a South Indian and chapatti and 
and want. Thus, the primary reason or vegetables for a North Indian person.
motivation for people to engage in the A marketer’s job in an organisation 
process of marketing is to satisfy some is to identify needs of the target 
of their needs or wants. In other words, customers and develop products and 
the focus of the marketing process is services that satisfy such needs.
on satisfaction of the needs and wants 2. creating a Market Offering: On 
of individuals and organisations. the part of the marketers, the effort 

A need is a state of felt deprivation involves creation of a ‘market offering. 
or feeling of being deprived of Market offering refers to a complete 
something. If unsatisfied, it leaves a offer for a product or service, having 
person unhappy and uncomfortable. given features like size, quality, taste, 
For example, on getting hungry, we etc; at a certain price; available at a 
become uncomfortable and start given outlet or location and so on. Let 
looking for objects that are capable of us say the offer is for a cell phone, 
satisfying our hunger. available in four different versions, 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   244 10-08-2022   10:04:27



MArkeTING

245

on the basis of certain features such offering the same by giving something 
as size of memory, television viewing, in return. For example, a person 
internet, camera, etc., for a given price, feeling hungry may get food by offering 
say between ` 5,000 and ` 20,000 to give money or some other product 
(depending on the model selected), or service in return to someone who 
available for sale at say firm’s exclusive is willing to accept the same for food.
shops in and around all metropolitan In the modern world, goods are 
cities in the country. A good ‘market produced at different places and are 
offer’ is the one which is developed after distributed over a wide geographical 
analysing the needs and preferences of area through various middlemen, 
the potential buyers. involving exchanges at different levels 
3. customer value:  The process of distribution. exchange is, therefore, 
of marketing facilitates exchange of referred to as the essence of marketing. 
products and services between the For any exchange to take place, it is 
buyers and the sellers. The buyers, important that the following conditions 
however, make buying decisions on are satisfied:
their perceptions of the value of the (i) Involvement of at least two parties 
product or service in satisfying their viz., the buyer and the seller.
need, in relation to its cost. A product (ii) each party should be capable 
will be purchased only if it is perceived of offering something of value to 
to be giving greatest benefit or value the other. For example, the seller 
for the money. The job of a marketer, offers a product and the buyer, 
therefore, is to add to the value of the money.
product so that the customers prefer it 
in relation to the competing products (iii) each party should have the ability 

and decide to purchase it. to communicate and deliver the 
product or service. No exchange 

4. exchange Mechanism: The process can take place if the buyers and 
of marketing works through the sellers are not able to communicate 
exchange mechanism. The individuals with each other or if they can not 
(buyers and sellers) obtain what they deliver something of value to 
need and want through the process of the other.
exchange. In other words, the process 
of marketing involves exchange of (iv) each party should have freedom to 
products and services for money or accept or reject other party’s offer.
something considered valuable by (v) The parties should be willing to 
the people. enter into transaction with each 

exchange refers to the process other. Thus, the acceptance or 
through which two or more parties rejection of the offer takes place on 
come together to obtain the desired voluntary basis rather than on the 
product or service from someone, bases of any compulsion.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   245 10-08-2022   10:04:27



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

246

The points listed above are the standards of people and providing 
necessary conditions for an exchange medication to the sick.
to take place. Whether the exchange 
actually takes place or not depends on markeTing managemenT
the suitability of the act of exchange to Marketing management means 
both the parties, whether it makes the management of the marketing function. 
parties better off or at least not worse off. In other words, marketing management 

Another important point to be refers to planning, organising, directing 
noted is that Marketing is not merely a and control of the activities which 
business phenomena or confined only facilitate exchange of goods and services 
to business organisations. Marketing between producers and consumers or 
activities are equally relevant to non- users of products and services. Thus 
profit organisations such as hospitals, the focus of marketing management 
schools, sports clubs and social and is on achieving desired exchange 
religious organisations. It helps these outcomes with the target markets. 
organisations in achieving their goals Taking a management perspective, the 
such as spreading the message of term marketing has been defined as 
family planning, improving the literacy “the process of planning and executing 

What can be Marketed?
Physical Products : DVD player, Motor cycle, ipods, Cell phone, Footwear, 

Television, refrigerator.
services : Insurance, Health Care, Business Process Outsourcing, 

Securi ty ,  easy Bi l l  serv ice,  Financial  Services 
(Investment),Computer education, Online Trading.

ideas : Polio Vaccination, Helpage, Family Planning, Donation of 
Blood (red cross), Donation of money on Flag Day (National 
Foundation for Communal Harmony).

Persons : For election of Candidates for Certain Posts.
Place : ‘Visit Agra – ‘City of Love’, ‘Udaipur – ‘The City of Lakes’, 

‘Mysore – The City of Gardens’, ‘When Orisa celebrates, 
eleven the God Join In’. 

events : Sports events (say Olympics, Cricket series), diwali mela, 
fashion show, music concert, film festival, elephant race 
(kerala Tourism).

information : Production packaging and distribution of information by 
organisations such as by universities, research organisation, 
providing information as market information (marketing 
research agencies), technology information.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   246 10-08-2022   10:04:27



MArkeTING

247

the conception, pricing, promotion prospective buyers and persuade 
and distribution of ideas, goods and them to buy these products.
services to create exchanges that satisfy Marketing management involves 
individual and organisational goals” by performance of various functions 
American Management Association, such as analysing and planning the 
similarly Philip kotler has defined marketing activities, implementing 
Marketing management as the art and marketing plans and setting control 
science of choosing target markets 

mechanism. These functions are 
and getting, keeping and growing 
customers through creating, delivering to be performed in such a way that 
and communicating superior customer organisation’s objectives are achieved 
values of management. at the minimum cost.

A careful analysis of the definition Marketing management generally 
reveals that the process of management is related to creation of demand. 
of marketing involves: However, in certain situations, the 
(i) Choosing a target market, say a manager has to restrict the demand. 

manufacturer may choose to make For example, if there is a situation of 
readymade garments for children ‘overfull demand’, i.e., the demand 
up to the age of 5 years; being more than what the company 

(ii) In respect of the target market can or want to handle, (like what 
chosen, the focus of the process of the situation in our country was 
management is on getting, keeping before the adoption of policies of 
as well as growing the customers. liberalisation and globalisation, in 
That means the marketer has to early 90’s, in most consumer products 
create demand for his products be it automobiles or electronics goods 
so that the target customers or other durable products. The job of 
purchase the product, keep them marketing mangers, in these situations 
satisfied with the firm’s products would be to find ways to reduce the 
and also attract more customers demand temporarily by say reducing 
to the firm’s products so that the the expenditure on promotion or 
firm can grow; and increasing the prices. Similarly, if the 

(iii) The mechanism for achieving demand is ‘irregular’, such as in case of 
the objective is through creating, seasonal products, (say fans, woollen 
developing and communicating clothes) the marketer’s job is to change 
superior values for the customers. the time pattern of demand through 
That means, the primary job such methods as providing short-term 
of a marketing manager is to incentives, to the buyers. Thus, the 
create superior values so that marketing management in not only 
the customers are attracted to concerned with creating demand but 
the products and services and with managing the demand effectively, 
communicate these values to the as per the situation in the market.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   247 10-08-2022   10:04:27



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

248

Marketing versus selling
Many people confuse ‘selling’ for ‘marketing’. They consider these two terms as one 
and the same. Marketing refers to a large set of activities of which selling is just one 
part. For example, a marketer of televisions, before making the sale, does a lot of 
other activities such as planning the type and model of televisions to be produced, 
the price at which it would be sold and selecting the distribution outlets at which the 
same would be available, etc. In short, marketing involves whole range of activities 
relating to planning, pricing, promoting and distributing the products that satisfy 
customer’s needs.

The function of selling, on the other hand, is restricted to promotion of goods and 
services through salesmanship, advertising, publicity and short-term incentives so 
that title of the product is transferred from seller to buyer or in other words product 
is converted into cash.

markeTing managemenT goods started picking up but the 
philosophies number of producers were limited. 

As a result, the demand exceeded 
In order to achieve desired exchange the supply. Selling was no problem. 
outcomes with target markets, it is Anybody who could produce the goods 
important to decide what philosophy or was able to sell. The focus of business 
thinking should guide the marketing activities was, therefore, on production 
ef forts of  an organisation. An of goods. It was believed that profits 
understanding of the philosophy or could be maximised by producing 
the concept to be adopted is important at large scale, thereby reducing the 
as it determines the emphasis or average cost of production. It was 
the weightage to be put on different also assumed that consumers would 
factors, in achieving the organisational favour those products which were 
objectives. For example, whether the widely available at an affordable price. 
marketing efforts of an organisation will Thus, availability and affordability 
focus on the product—say designing of the product were considered to 
its features etc or on selling techniques be the key to the success of a firm. 
or on customer’s needs or the social Therefore, greater emphasis was 
concerns. placed on improving the production 

The concept or philosophy of and distribution efficiency of the firms.
marketing has evolved over a period 
of time, and is discussed as follows. the Product concept

the Production concept As a result of emphasis on production 
capacity during the earlier days, the 

During the earlier days of industrial position of supply increased over 
revolution, the demand for industrial period of time. Mere availability and 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   248 10-08-2022   10:04:27



MArkeTING

249

low price of the product could not advertising, personal selling and sales 
ensure increased sale and as such the promotion were considered essential 
survival and growth of the firm. Thus, for selling of products. Thus, the focus 
with the increase in the supply of the of business firms shifted to pushing 
products, customers started looking the sale of products through aggressive 
for products which were superior in selling techniques with a view to 
quality, performance and features. persuade, lure or coax the buyers 
Therefore, the emphasis of the firms to buy the products. Making sale 
shifted from quantity of production through any means became important. 
to quality of products. The focus of It was assumed that buyers can be 
business activity changed to bringing manipulated but what was forgotten 
continuous improvement in the quality, was that in the long run what matters 
incorporating new features, etc. Thus, most is the customer satisfaction, 
product improvement became the key rather than anything else.
to profit maximisation of a firm, under 
the concept of product orientation. the Marketing concept

Marketing orientation implies that 
the selling concept focus on satisfaction of customer’s 
With the passage of time, the marketing needs is the key to the success of 
environment underwent further any organisation in the market. 

change. The increase in the scale of It assumes that in the long run 
an organisation can achieve its 

business further improved the position 
objective of maximisation of profit by 

with respect to supply of goods, 
identifying the needs of its present 

resulting in increased competition and prospective buyers and satisfying 
among sellers. The product quality them in an effective way. All the 
and availability did not ensure the decisions in a firm are taken from 
survival and growth of firms because the point of view of the customers. In 
of the large number of sellers selling other words, customer’s satisfaction 
quality products. This led to greater become the focal point of all decision 
importance to attracting and persuading making in the organisation. For 
customers to buy the product. The example, what product wil l  be 
business philosophy changed. It was produced, with what features and at 
assumed that the customers would what price shall it be sold, or where 
not buy, or not buy enough, unless shall it be made available for sale will 
they are adequately convinced and depend on what do the customers 
motivated to do so. Therefore, firms want. If the customers want features 
must undertake aggressive selling like double door in a refrigerator or a 
and promotional efforts to make separate provision for water cooler in 
customers buy their products. The it, the organisation would produce a 
use of promotional techniques such as refrigerator with these features, would 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   249 10-08-2022   10:04:27



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

250

price it at a level which the customers (i) Identi f ication of  market or 
are willing to pay and so on. If all customer who are chosen as the 
marketing decisions are taken with target of marketing effort.
this prospective, selling will not be any (ii) Understanding needs and wants 
problem. It will automatically follow. of customers in the target market.
The basic role of a firm then is to (iii) Development of products or 
‘identify a need and fill it’. The concept services for satisfying needs of 
implies that products ad-services are the target market.
bought not merely because of their 
quality, packing or brand name, (iv) Satisfying needs of target market 
but because they satisfy a specific better than the competitors.

need of a customer. A pre-requisite (v) Doing all this at a profit.
for the success of any organisation, Thus, the focus of the marketing 
therefore, is to understand and concept is on customer needs and the 
respond to customer needs. customer satisfaction becomes the 

To sum up, the marketing concept means to achieving the firms’ objective 
is based on the following pillars: of maximising profit. The purpose of 

Differences in the Marketing Management Philosophies

Philosophies/ Production  Product selling  Marketing  societal
 bases concept concept concept concept concept

1. Starting Factory Factory Factory Market Market,
 Point     Society

2. Main Quantity of  Quality, existing Customer Customer 
 Focus product performance, product needs needs and 
   features of   society’s 
   product   well being

3. Means Availability  Product  Selling  Integrated  Integrated 
  and improve- and  marketing marketing
  affordability ments promoting
  of product

4. Ends Profit through  Profit through  Profit  Profit  Profit 
  volume of product  through  through  through 
  production quality sales customer  customer 
    volume     satisfaction  satisfaction
      and social
      welfare

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   250 10-08-2022   10:04:27



MArkeTING

251

marketing is to generate customer to consumers or users in such a way 
value at a profit. that maximises the satisfaction of 

customers’ needs. From the view point 
the societal Marketing concept of management function, number of 
The marketing concept, as described activities are involved, which have 
in the preceeding section cannot be been described as below:

considered as adequate if we look 1. gathering and analysing Market 
at the challenges posed by social information: One of the important 
problems like environmental pollution, functions of a marketer is to gather 
deforestation, shortage of resources, and analyse market information. This 
population explosion and inflation. It is is necessary to identify the needs 
so because any activity which satisfies of the customers and take various 
human needs but is detrimental to the decisions for the successful marketing 
interests of the society at large cannot of the products and services. This 
be justified. The business orientation is important for making an analysis 
should, therefore, not be short-sighted of the available opportunities and 
to serve only consumers’ needs. It threats as well as strengths and 
should also consider large issues of long- weaknesses of the organisation and 
term social welfare, as illustrated above. help in deciding what opportunities 

The societal marketing concept can best be pursued by it. For example, 
holds that the task of any organisation rapid growth is predicted in several 
is to identify the needs and wants areas in the Indian economy, say in 
of the target market and deliver the the use of the Internet, market for cell 
desired satisfaction in an effective phones and several other areas. Which 
and efficient manner so that the long- of these areas a particular organisation 
term well-being of the consumers and should enter, or in which area should 
the society is taken care of. Thus, it expand, requires a careful scanning 
the societal marketing concept is the of the strengths and weaknesses of the 
extension of the marketing concept organisation, which is done with the 
as supplemented by the concern for help of careful market analysis.

the long-term welfare of the society. With the growth of computers, 
a new trend has emerged in the 

Apart from the customer satisfaction, 
collection of market information. 

it pays attention to the social, ethical More and more companies are using 
and ecological aspects of marketing. interactive sites on the internet, to 
There are large number of such issues gather customer views and opinions, 
that need to be attended. before taking important business 

F decisions. One of the popular TV 
unCTions oF markeTing

News Channel (in Hindi) seeks viewers 
Marketing is concerned with exchange choice (through SMS) on which of the 
of goods and services from producers given four or five main news stories 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   251 10-08-2022   10:04:27



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

252

of the day would be broadcasted as and consistency in the output. 
detailed story at the prime time, to S tandard i sa t i on  ensures  the 
ensure that the viewers get to listen buyers that goods conform to the 
to the story of their own choice. predetermined standards of quality, 
2. Marketing Planning: Another price and packaging and reduces 
important activity or area of work of the need for inspection, testing and 
a marketer is to develop appropriate evaluation of the products.
marketing plans so that the marketing Grad ing  i s  the  process  o f 
objectives of the organisation can be classification of products into different 
achieved. For example a marketer of groups, on the basis of some of its 
colour TV, having 10 per cent of the important characteristics such as 
current market share in the country, quality, size, etc. Grading is particularly 
aims at enhancing his market share necessary for products which are not 
to 20 per cent, in the next three years. produced according to predetermined 
He will have to develop a complete specifications, such as in the case 
marketing plan covering various of agricultural products, say wheat, 
important aspects including the plan oranges, etc. Grading ensures that 
for increasing the level of production, goods belong to a particular quality 
promotion of the products, etc., and and helps in realising higher prices for 
specify the action programmes to high quality output.
achieve these objectives. 5. Packaging and Labelling: Packaging 
3 . P r o d u c t  D e s i g n i n g  a n d refers to designing and developing the 
Development: Another important package for the products. Labelling 
marketing activity or decision refers to designing and developing the 
area relates to product designing label to be put on the package. The 
and development. The design of label may vary from a simple tag to 
the product contributes to making complex graphics.
the product attractive to the target Packaging and labelling have 
customers. A good design can improve become so important in modern day 
performance of a product and also marketing that these are considered 
give it a competitive advantage in the as the pillars of marketing. Packaging 
market. For example, when we plan is important not only for protection 
to buy any product say a motorbike, of the products but also serves as 
we not only see its features like cost, a promotional tool. Sometimes, the 
mileage, but also the design aspects quality of the product is assessed by 
like its shape, style, etc. the buyers form packaging. We have 
4. standardisation and grading: seen that in the success of many of the 
Standardisation refers to producing consumer brands in recent times such 
goods of predetermined specifications, as Lays or Uncle Chips potato wafers 
which helps in achieving uniformity Clinic Plus shampoos, and Colgate 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   252 10-08-2022   10:04:27



MArkeTING

253

Toothpaste, etc., packaging has played Customer support services are very 
an important role. effective in bringing repeat sales from 
6. branding: A very important decision the customers and developing brand 
area for marketing of most consumer loyality for a product.
products is whether to sell the product 8. Pricing of Product: Price of 
in its generic name (name of the product refers to the amount of money 
category of the product, say Fan, Pen, customers have to pay to obtain a 
etc.) or to sell them in a brand name product. Price is an important factor 
(such as Pollar Fan or rottomac Pen). affecting the success or failure of a 
Brand name helps in creating product product in the market. The demand 
differentiation, i.e., providing basis for for a product or service is related to 
distinguishing the product of a firm its price. Generally lower the price, 
with that of the competitor, which in higher would be the demand for the 
turn, helps in building customer’s product and vice-versa. The marketers 
loyality and in promoting its sale. have to properly analyse the factors 
The important decision areas in determining the price of a product and 
respect of branding include deciding take several crucial decisions in this 
the branding strategy, say whether respect, including setting the pricing 
each product will be given a separate objectives, determining the pricing 
brand name or the same brand name strategies, determining the price and 
will be extended to all products of the changing the prices.
company, say Phillips bulbs, tubes 9.  Promotion: Promotion of products 
and television or Videocon washing and services involves informing the 
machine, television, and refrigerator. customers about the firm’s product, 
Selection of the brand name plays its features, etc., and persuading 
an important role in the success of a them to purchase these products. 
product. The four important methods of 
7. customer support services: promotion include advertising, 
A very important function of the Personal Selling, Publicity and 
marketing management relates Sales Promotion. A marketer has 
to developing customer support to take several crucial, decisions in 
services such as after sales services, respect of promotion of the products 
handling customer complaints and services such as deciding the 
and adjustments, procuring credit promotion budget, the promotion 
services, maintenance services, mix, i.e., the combination of the 
technical services and consumer promotional tools that will be use, 
information. All these services aim the promotion budget, etc.
at providing maximum satisfaction 10.  Physical Distribution: Managing 
to the customers, which is the key to physical distribution is another 
marketing success in modern days. very important function in the 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   253 10-08-2022   10:04:27



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

254

marketing of goods and services. 12. storage or Warehousing : 
The two major decision areas under Usually there is a time gap between 
this function include (a) decision the production or procurement of 
regarding channels of distribution goods and their sale or use. It may 
or the marketing intermediaries (like be because of irregular demand for 
whole salers, retailers) to be used the products such as in the case 
and (b) physical movement of the of woollen garments or raincoats, 
product from where it is produced or there may be irregular supply 
to a place where it is required by the because of seasonal production such 
customers for their consumption or as in the case of agricultural products 
use. The important decision areas (sugarcane, rice, wheat, cotton, etc.). 
under physical distribution include In order to maintain smooth flow 
managing inventory (levels of stock of products in the market, there 
of goods), storage and warehousing is a need for proper storage of the 
and transportation of goods from one products. Further, there is a need for 
place to the other. storage of adequate stock of goods to 
11. transportation: Transportation protect against unavoidable delays in 
involves physical movement of goods delivery or to meet out contingencies 
from one place to the other. As in the demand. In the process of 
generally the users of products, marketing, the function of storage 
particularly consumer products is performed by different agencies 
are wide spread and geographically such as manufacturers, wholesalers 

separated from the place these are and retailers.

produced, it is necessary to move 
them to the place where it is needed markeTing mix

for consumption or use, For example, The marketing mix consists of various 
tea produced in Assam has to be elements, which have broadly been 
transported not only within the state classified into four categories, popularly 
but to other far off places like Tamil known as four Ps of marketing. These 
Nadu, Punjab, Jammu and kashmir are: (i) Product, (ii) Price, (iii) Place, 
and Haryana, rajasthan, where it is and (iv) Promotion. These are briefly 
consumed. discussed as follows:

A marketing firm has to analyse 1. Product: Product means goods 
its transportation needs after taking or services or ‘anything of value’, 
into consideration various factors which is offered to the market for 
such as nature of the product, cost sale. For example, Hindustan lever 
and location of target market and offers number of consumer products 
take decisions in respect of mode like toiletries (Close-Up toothpaste, 
of transportation to be chosen and Lifebuoy soap, etc.), detergent powder 
other related aspects. (Surf, Wheel), food products (Refined 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   254 10-08-2022   10:04:27



MArkeTING

255

Vegetable Oil); Tata offers Tata Steel, etc. These aspects are very important, 
Trucks, Salt and a large number of particularly in the marketing of 
other products; LG electronics offers consumer durable products (like 
televisions, refrigerators, colour Automobiles, refrigerators, etc.). The 
monitors for computers, etc; Amul important product decisions include 
offers a number of food products deciding about the features, quality, 
(Amul milk, ghee, butter, cheese, packaging, labelling and branding of 
chocolates, etc.). the products.

The concept of product relates 2. Price: Price is the amount of money 
to not only the physical product as customers have to pay to obtain 
mentioned in the above examples but the product. In case of most of the 
also the benefits offered by it from products, level of price affects the level 
customer’s view point (for example of their demand. The marketers have 
toothpaste is bought for whitening not only to decide about the objectives 
teeth, strengthening gums, etc.). of price setting but to analyse the 
The concept of product also include factors determining the price and fix a 
the extended product or what is price for the firm’s products. Decisions 
offered to the customers by way have also to be taken in respect of 
of after sales services, handling discounts to customers, traders and 
complaints, availability of spare parts credit terms, etc., so that customers 

Marketing Mix: elements

Product Price
Product Mix Price Level
Product Quality Margins
New Product Pricing Policy
Design and Development Pricing Strategies
Packaging Price Change
Labelling
Branding

Place Promotion
Channel Strategy Promotion Mix
Channel Selection Advertising
Channel Conflict Personal Selling
Channel Cooperation  Sales Promotion
Physical Distribution Publicity
 Public relations

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   255 10-08-2022   10:04:27



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

256

perceive the price to be in line with the newspaper, magazines, the objections 
value of the product. of customers, etc.).
3.  Place: Place or Physical Distribution The success of a market offer will 
include activities that make firm’s depend on how well these ingredients 
products available to the target are mixed to create superior value for 
customers. Important decision areas the customers and simultaneously 
in this respect include selection of achieve their sale and profit objectives. 
dealers or intermediaries to reach the Let us say a firm would like to achieve 
customers, providing support to the necessary volume of sale at a cost that 
intermediaries (by way of discounts, will permit a desired level of profit. 
promotional campaigns, etc.). The But so many alternative mixes can 
intermediaries in turn keep inventory be adopted by a firm to achieve this 

of the firm’s products, demonstrate objectives. The issue before a firm then 
is to decide what would be the most 

them to potential buyers, negotiate 
effective combination of elements to 

price with buyers, close sales and 
achieve the given objectives.

also service the products after the 
sale. The other decision areas relate proDuCTs
to managing inventory, storage and 
warehousing and transportation of From the customer’s point of view, a 
goods from the place it is produced to product is a bundle of utilities, which 
the place it is required by the buyers. is purchased because of its capability 
4. Promotion: Promotion of products to provide satisfaction of certain need. 
and services include activities that A buyer buys a product or service 
communicate availability, features, for what it does for her or the benefit 
merits, etc., of the products to the it provides to her. There can be three 
target customers and persuade them to types of benefits a customer may 

buy it. Most marketing organisations, seek to satisfy from the purchase of a 
product, viz., 

undertake various promotional 
(i)  functional benefits, 

activities and spend substantial 
amount of money on the promotion (ii)  psychological benefits, and 
of their goods through using number (iii)  social benefits. 
of tools such as advertising, personal For example, the purchase of a 
selling and sales promotion techniques motorcycle provides functional utility 
(like price discounts, free samples, of transportation, but at the same 
etc.). A large number of decisions time satisfies the need for prestige and 
are to be taken in each of the area esteem and provides social benefit by 
specified above. For example, in the the way of acceptance from a group, 
respect of advertising it is important to by riding a motorbike. Thus, all these 
decide about the message, the media aspects should be considered while 
to be used (example, print-media– planning for a product.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   256 10-08-2022   10:04:27



MArkeTING

257

Classification of Products 1. convenience Products: Those 

Products may broadly be classified consumer products, which are purchased 

into two categories — (i) consumers’ frequently, immediately and with least time 
products, and (ii) industrial products. and efforts are referred to as convenience 
The consumer products may further goods. examples of such products 
be classified into different groups, as are cigarettes, ice creams, medicines, 
detailed below: newspaper, stationery items toothpaste 

etc. These products have low unit-value 
Consumer proDuCTs and are bought in small qualities.

2. shopping Products: Shopping 
Products, which are purchased by 

products are those consumer goods 
the ultimate consumers or users for 
satisfying their personal needs and where buyers devote considerable 

desires are referred to as consumer time, to compare the quality, price, 
products. For example, soap, edible style, suitability, etc., at several stores, 
oil, eatables, textiles, toothpaste, fans, before making final purchase. Some 
etc. which we use for our personal and of the examples of shopping products 
non-business use are consumer goods. are clothes, shoes, jewellery, furniture, 
We can classify the consumer product radio, television, etc. 
into the following three categories as 3. speciality Products: Speciality 
here under: products are those consumer goods 

Products

Consumer Products Industrial Products

Durability Basis Shopping efforts Involved

Non- Durable Services Conven- Shopping Speciality
Durable ience Products Products

Products

Classification of Products

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   257 10-08-2022   10:04:27



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

258

Convenience Products

which have certain special features DuraBiliTy oF proDuCTs
because of which people make special On the basis of their durability, 
efforts in their purchase. These the consumer products have been 
products are such, which have reached classified into three categories— 
a brand loyalty of the highest order, Durable, Non-durable and Services.
with a significant number of buyers. 1. non-durable Products: The 
The buyers are willing to spend a lot consumer products which are 
of time and efforts on the purchase normal ly  consumed in one or 
of such products. For example, if few uses are called non-durable 
there is a rare collection of artwork products. For example, products like 
or of antiques, some people may be toothpaste, detergents, bathing soap 
willing to spend a lot of shopping and stationary products etc. From 
effort and travel long distance to buy the marketing point of view, these 
such products. In our day-to-day life, products generally command a small 
we see people going to a particular margin, should be made available 
hair-cutting saloon or restaurant, or in many locations and need to be 
a tailor. The demand for these goods heavily advertised.

is relatively inelastic, i.e., even if the 2. Durable Products: Those tangible 
price is increased, the demand does consumer products which normally 
not come down. survive many years, for example, 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   258 10-08-2022   10:04:27



MArkeTING

259

Shopping Products

refrigerator, radio, bicycle, sewing inDusTrial proDuCTs
machine and kitchen gadgets are Industrial products are those products, 
referred to as durable products. which are used as inputs in producing 
These goods are generally used for other products. The examples of such 
a longer period, command a higher products are raw materials, engines, 
per unit margin, require greater lubricants, machines, tools, etc. In 
personal- selling efforts, guarantees other words, industrial products are 
and after sales services, on the part meant for non-personal and business 
of the seller. use for producing other products.
3. services: By services we mean The market for industrial products 
those intangible activities, benefits consists of manufacturers, transport 

which are offered for sale, e.g., dry agencies, banks and insurance 
companies, mining companies and 

cleaning, watch repairs, hair cutting, public utilities. Industrial products 
postal services, services offered by a are those products, which are used as 
doctor, an architect and a lawyer. inputs in producing other products. 

The examples of such products are 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   259 10-08-2022   10:04:27



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

260

Speciality Products

raw materials, engines, lubricants, petroleum, iron ore), fish and lumber; 
machines, tools, etc. In other words, and (b) manufactured material and 
industrial products are meant for parts. These are again of two types – 
non-personal and business use for component materials like glass, iron, 
producing other products. plastic and component parts such as 
The market for industrial products tyre, electric bulb, steering, and battery.
consists of manufacturers, transport (ii) capital items: These are such 
agencies, banks and insurance goods that are used in the production 
companies, mining companies and of finished goods. These include: (a) 
public utilities. installations like elevators, mainframe 

Computers, and (b) equipments like 
Classification Hand Tools, Personal Computer, Fax 
The industrial goods are classified Machines, etc.
into the following major categories: (iii) supplies and business services: 
(i) Materials and Parts: These include These are short lasting goods and 
goods that enter the manufacture’s services that facilitate developing or 
products completely. Such goods managing the finished product. These 
are of two types: (a) raw material: include: (a) maintenance and repair 
including farm products like cotton, items like Paint, Nails, etc., and (b) 
sugar cane, oil seed and natural operating supplies like Lubricant, 
products such as minerals (say crude Computer Stationary,  Writing  Paper, etc.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   260 10-08-2022   10:04:27



MArkeTING

261

Industrial Goods

Materials and Capital Items Supplies and
Parts  Business Services

raw Manufactured  Installations equipments Maintanence Operating
Material  Material and Parts   and repair  Supplies
    items

Farm Natural Component Component
Products Products Material Parts

Classification of Industrial Goods

BranDing If products were sold by generic 
names, it would be very difficult for the 

One of the most important decisions marketers to distinguish their products 
that a marketer has to take in the area from that of their competitors. Thus, 
of ‘product’ is in respect of branding. most marketers give a name to their 
He has to decide whether the firm’s product, which helps in identifying and 
products will be marketed under distinguishing their products from the 
a brand name or a generic name. competitors’ products. This process of 
Generic name refers to the name of giving a name or a sign or a symbol 
the whole class of the product. For etc., to a product is called branding. 
example, a book, a wristwatch, tyre, The various terms relating to branding 
camera, toilet soap, etc. We know are as follows:
that a camera is a lens surrounded 1. brand: A brand is a name, term, sign, 
by plastic or steel from all sides and symbol, design or some combination of 
having certain other features such them, used to identify the products—
as a flash gun and so on. Similarly goods or services of one seller or group 
book is a bunch of papers, which of sellers and to differentiate them from 
are in a bound form, on which some those of the competitors. For example, 
useful information about a subject some of the common brands are Bata, 
is printed. Thus, all products having Lifebuoy, Dunlop, and Parker. Brand 
these characteristics would be called is a comprehensive term, which has 
by the generic name such as camera two components—brand name and 
or book. brand mark.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   261 10-08-2022   10:04:28



BUSINESS  STUDIES
262

2. Brand Name: That part of a brand, (ii) A brand should suggest the 
which can be spoken, is called a brand product’s benefits and qualities. 
name. In other words, brand name is It should be appropriate to the 
the verbal component of a brand. product’s function.
3. Brand Mark: That part of a brand (iii) A brand name should be distinctive.
which can be recognised but which is (iv) The brand name should be 
not utterable is called brand mark. It adaptable to packing or labelling 
appears in the form of a symbol, design, requirements ,  to  d i f f e rent 
distinct colour scheme or lettering. advertising media and to different 
4. Trade Mark: A brand or part of a languages.
brand that is given legal protection (v) T h e  b r a n d  n a m e  s h o u l d 
is called trademark. The protection is be sufficiently  versatile to 
given against its use by other firms. accommodate new products, which 
Thus the firm, which got its brand are added to the product line.
registered, gets the exclusive right for (vi) It should be capable of being 
its use. In that case, no other firm can registered and protected legally.
use such name or mark in the country.

Though branding adds to the cost (vii) Chosen name should have staying 
e.g., to the cost of packaging, labelling, power i.e., it should not get out 
legal protection, and promotion, it of date.
provides several advantages to the 
sellers as well as the consumers. Packaging

One of the most important developments 
Characteristics of Good Brand Name affecting the business world in 
Choosing the right brand name is recent years has been in the area of 
not an easy decision. What makes packaging. Many products, which we 
this decision important is the fact thought could never lend themselves 
that once a brand name is chosen to packing because of their nature, 
and the product is launched in have been successfully packed e.g., 
the market, changing the brand Pulses, Ghee, Milk, Salt, Cold Drinks, 
name is very difficult. So, getting it etc. Packaging refers to the act of 
right the first time is very essential. designing and producing the container 
Following are some of the considerations, or wrapper of a product. Packaging 
which should be kept in mind while plays a very important role in the 
choosing a brand name. marketing success or failure of many 
(i) The brand name should be short, products, particularly the consumer 

easy to pronounce, spell, recognise non-durable products. In fact if one 
and remember e.g., Ponds, VIP, makes an analysis of the reasons for 
Rin, Vim, etc. the success of some of the successful 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   262 2/6/2024   10:04:04 AM



MARkETING
263

products in the recent past, it can be product (e.g., a toothpaste tube, a 
noted that packaging has played its match box, etc.).
due role. For example, it was one of 2. Secondary Packaging: It refers to 
the important factors in the success of additional layers of protection that are 
products like Maggie’s Noodles, Uncle kept till the product is ready for use, 
Chips or Crax wafers. e.g., a tube of shaving cream usually 

comes in a card board box. When 
Levels of Packaging consumers start using the shaving 
There can be three different levels of cream, they will dispose off the box 
packaging. These are as below: but retain the primary tube.
1. Primary Package: It refers to the 3. Transportation Packaging: It refers 
product’s immediate container. In to further packaging components 
some cases, the primary package is necessary for storage, identification 
kept till the consumer is ready to use or transportation. For example, a 
the product (e.g., plastic packet for toothpaste manufacturer may send the 
socks); whereas in other cases, it is goods to retailers in corrugated boxes 
kept throughout the entire life of the containing 10, 20, or 100 units.

Levels of Packaging

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   263 1/23/2024   05:45:40 PM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
264

Importance of Packaging perception of customers about the 
Packaging has acquired great quality of the product. For example, 
significance in the marketing of goods by looking at the package of a 
and services, because of following product say Paint or Hair Oil, one 
reasons: can make some guess about quality 

of the product contained in it.
(i) Rising Standards of Health 

and Sanitation: Because of the 
increasing standards of living Functions of Packaging
in the country, more and more As stated above, packaging performs a 
people have started purchasing number of functions in the marketing 
packed goods as the chances of of goods. Some of the important 
adulteration in such goods are functions are as follows:
minimised. (i) Product Identification: Packaging 

(ii) Self Service Outlets: The self- greatly helps in identification 
service retail outlets are becoming of the products. For example, 
very popular, particularly in major Colgate in red colour, or Ponds 
cities and towns. Because of cream jar can be easily identified 
this, some of the traditional role by its package.
assigned to personal selling in (ii) Product Protection: Packaging 
respect of promotion has gone to protects the contents of a product 
packaging. from spoilage, breakage, leakage, 

(iii) Innovational Opportunity: Some of pilferage, damage, climatic effect, 
the recent developments in the etc. This kind of protection 
area of packaging have completely is required during storing, 
changed the marketing scene distribution and transportation 
in the country. For example, of the product.
milk can now be stored for 4-5 (iii) Facilitating Use of the Product: The 
days without refrigeration in size and shape of the package 
the recently developed packing should be such that it should be 
materials. Similarly, in the area convenient to open, handle and 
of pharmaceuticals, soft drinks, use for the consumers. Cosmetics, 
etc., lots of new innovations have medicines and tubes of toothpastes 
come in respect of packaging. As a are good examples of this.
result, the scope for the marketing (iv) Product Promotion: Packaging is 
of such products has increased. also used for promotion purposes. 

(iv) Product Differentiation: Packaging A start l ing colour scheme, 
is one of the very important means photograph or typeface may be 
of creating product differentiation. used to attract attention of the 
The colour, size, material, etc., of people at the point of purchase. 
package makes real difference in the Sometimes it may work even better 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   264 1/23/2024   05:45:40 PM



MARkETING
265

than advertising. In self-service ‘Complete Germicheck Formula’; 
stores, this role of packaging the Package of a brand of Coconut 
becomes all the more important. Oil describes the product as pure 

coconut oil with Heena, Amla, Lemon 
Labelling and specifies how these are good for 

Hair. Thus, one of the most important 
A simple looking but important task functions of labels is to describe the 
in the marketing of goods relates to product, its usage, cautions in use, 
designing the label to be put on the etc. and specify its contents.
package. The label may vary from a 
simple tag attached to the product 2. Identification of the Product 
(such as in case of local unbranded or brand :  The other important 
products like sugar, wheat, pulses, function performed by labels is 
etc.) indicating some information to help in identifying the product 
about the quality or price, to complex or brand. For example, the brand 
graphics that are part of the package, name of any product, say Biscuits 
like the ones on branded products. or Potato Chips imprinted on its 
Lables are useful in providing detailed package helps us to identify, from 
information about the product, its number of packages, which one is 
contents, method of use, etc. The our favourite brand. Other common 
various functions performed by a label identification information provided 
are as follows: by the labels include name and 

address of the manufacturer, net 
1. Describe the Product and specify weight when packed, manufacturing 
its contents: Let us look at some of the date, maximum retail price and 
labels of the products used by us in our Batch number.
day to day life. The label on the package 
of a local tea company describes the 3. Grading of Products: Another 
company as ‘Mohini Tea Company, an important function performed by 
ISO 9001:200C Certified Company’; a labels is to help grading the products 
popular brand of Prickly Heat Powder, into different categories. Sometimes 
describes how the product provides marketers assign different grades to 
relief from prickly heat and controls indicate different features or quality of 
bacterial growth and infection, giving the product. For example, a popular 
caution forbidding its application on brand of Hair Conditioners comes in 
cuts and wounds. Package of fast food different categories for different hair, 
products like ready to eat Dosa, Idli say for ‘normal hair’ and for other 
or Noodles, describe the procedure of categories. Different type of tea is sold 
cooking these products; the Package by some brands under Yellow, red and 
of a toothpaste brand lists the ‘Ten Green Label categories.
Teeth and Gum Problems’, which 4. Helps in Promotion of Products: 
the product claims to fight with its An important function of label is to 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   265 1/23/2024   05:45:40 PM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
266

aid in promotion of the products. A represent the sum of values that 
carefully designed label can attract consumers exchange for the benefit 
attention and give reason to purchase. of having or using the product and is 
We see many product labels providing referred to as the price of the product. 
promotional messages for example, Similarly, money paid for the services 
the pack of a popular Amla Hair Oil such as fare for the transport service, 
states, ‘Baalon mein Dum, Life mein premium for an insurance policy, and 
Fun’. The label on the package of a fee to a doctor for his medical advise 
brand of Detergent Powder says, ‘keep represent the price of these services. 
cloth look good and your machine in Price may therefore be defined as the 
top condition’. Labels play important amount of money paid by a buyer (or 
role in sales promotional schemes received by a seller) in consideration 
launched by companies. For example of the purchase of a product or 
the label on the package of a Shaving a services. 
Cream mentions, ‘40% Extra Free’ or Pricing occupies an important 
package of a toothpaste mentioning, place in the marketing of goods and 
‘Free Toothbrush Inside’, or ‘Save ̀  15’. services by a firm. No product can 

be launched without a price tag or 
5. Providing Information Required at least some guidelines for pricing. 
by Law: Another important function Pricing is often used as a regulator of 
of labeling is to provide information the demand of a product. Generally, 
required by law. For example, if the price of a product is increased, 
packaged food articles must have list i ts  demand comes down,  and 
of ingredients declaration regarding vice-versa.
vegetarian or non-vegetarian food Pricing is considered to be an 
additives and date of manufacturing effective competitive weapon. In the 
or packing on the label.  Such conditions of perfect competition, 
information is required on processed most of the firms compete with each 
foods, drugs and tobacco products. other on the basis of this factor. It is 
In case of hazardous or poisonous also the single most important factor 
material, appropriate safety-warning affecting the revenue and profits of a 
need to be put on the label. firm. Thus, most marketing firms give 

Thus, labels perform number high importance to the fixation of price 
of important functions relating to for their products and services.
communicating with the potential 
buyers and promoting the sale of Factors affecting Price 
the products. Determination

P There are number of factors which 
ricing affect the fixation of the price of a 

When a product is bought, some product. Some of the important factors 
money is paid for it. This money in this regard are discussed as below:

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   266 1/23/2024   05:45:40 PM



MARkETING
267

1. Product cost: One of the most Semi variable costs are those costs 
important factor affecting price which vary with the level of activity 
of a product or service is its cost. but not in direct proportion with it. 
This includes the cost of producing, For example, compensation of a sales 
distributing and selling the product. person may include a fixed salary of 
The cost sets the minimum level or say ` 10,000 plus a commission of 5 
the floor price at which the product per cent on sales. With an increase 
may be sold. Generally all marketing in the volume of sales, the total 
firms strive to cover all their costs, compensation will increase but not in 
at least in the long run. In addition, direct proportion with the change in 
they aim at earning a margin of profit the volume of sale.
over and above the costs. In certain Total Costs are the sum total of the 
circumstance, for example, at the time fixed, variable and semi-variable costs 
of introducing a new product or while for the specific level of activity, say 
entering a new market, the products volume of sales or quantity produced.
may be sold at a price, which does not 2. The Utility and Demand: While 
cover all the costs. But in the long run, the product costs set the lower limits 
a firm cannot survive unless at least of the price, the utility provided by the 
all its costs are covered. product and the intensity of demand of 

There are broadly three types of the buyer sets the upper limit of price, 
costs: viz., Fixed Costs, Variable Costs which a buyer would be prepared 
and Semi Variable Costs. Fixed costs to pay. In fact the price must reflect 
are those costs, which do not vary with the interest of both the parties to the 
the level of activity of a firm say with transaction—the buyer and the seller. 
the volume of production or sale. For The buyer may be ready to pay up to 
example, rent of a building or salary the point where the utility from the 
of a sales manager remains the same product is at least equal to the sacrifice 
whether 1000 units or 10 units are made in terms of the price paid. The 
produced in a week. seller would, however, try to at least 

Those costs which vary in direct cover the costs. According to the law of 
proportion with the level of activity are demand, consumers usually purchase 
called variable costs. For example, the more units at a low price than at a 
costs of raw material, labour and power high price.
are directly related with the quantity of 3. Extent of Competition in the 
goods produced. Let us say, if the cost Market: Between the lower limit and 
of wood for manufacturing one chair the upper limit where would the price 
comes to ` 100 the cost of wood for 10 settle down? This is affected by the 
chairs would be ` 1000. Obviously, nature and the degree of competition. 
there will be no cost of wood if no chair The price will tend to reach the upper 
is produced. limit in case there is lesser degree of 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   267 1/23/2024   05:45:40 PM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
268

competition while under conditions of maximising profit in the short run and 
free competition, the price will tend to in the long run. If the firm decides to 
be set at the lowest level maximise profits in the short run, it 

Competitors’ prices and their would tend to charge maximum price 
anticipated reactions must be for its products. But if it is to maximise 
considered before fixing the price its total profit in the long run, it would 
of a product. Not only the price but opt for a lower per unit price so that it 
the quality and the features of the can capture larger share of the market 
competitive products must be examined and earn greater profits through 
carefully, before fixing the price. increased sales.
4. Government and Legal Regulations: Apart from profit maximisation, 
In order to protect the interest of public the pricing objectives of a firm may 
against unfair practices in the field of include:
price fixing, Government can intervene (a) Obtaining Market Share Leadership: 
and regulate the price of commodities. If a firms objective is to obtain 
Government can declare a product larger share of the market; it will 
as essential product and regulate its keep the price of its products at 
price. For example, the cost of a drug lower levels so that greater number 
manufactured by a company having of people are attracted to purchase 
monopoly in the production of the the products;
same come to ` 20 per strip of ten (b) Surviving in a Competitive Market: 
and the buyer is prepared to pay any If a firm is facing difficulties in 
amount for it, say ̀  200. In the absence surviving in the market because of 
of any competitor, the seller may intense competition or introduction 
be tempted to extort the maximum of a more efficient substitute 
amount of ` 200 for the drug and by a competitor, it may resort 
intervene to regulate the price. Usually to discounting its products or 
in such a case, the Government does running a promotion campaign to 
not allow the firms to charge such a liquidate its stock; and
high price and intervene to regulate the (c) A t ta in ing  P roduc t  Qua l i t y 
price of the drug. This can be done by Leadership: In this case, normally 
the Government by declaring the drug higher prices are charged to cover 
as essential commodity and regulating high quality and high cost of 
its price. research and Development.
5. Pricing Objectives : Pricing Thus, the price of a firm’s products 
objectives are another important factor and services is affected by the pricing 
affecting the fixation of the price of a objective of the firm.
product or a service. Generally the 6. Marketing Methods Used: Price 
objective is stated to be maximise the fixation process is also affected by 
profits. But there is a difference in other elements of marketing such 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   268 1/23/2024   05:45:40 PM



MARkETING
269

as distribution system, quality of promoted, these must be made 
salesmen employed, quality and available to customers at the right 
amount of advertising, sales promotion place, in right quantity and at the right 
efforts, the type of packaging, product time. For example, a person convinced 
differentiation, credit facility and about the quality, etc. of a product, say, 
customer services provided. For a detergent bar, wants to purchase the 
example, if a company provides free same. He/She goes to a retail outlet and 
home delivery, it has some of flexibility asks for the product. If that product is 
in fixing prices. Similarly, uniqueness not available in that shop, he/she may 
of any of the elements mentioned purchase some of the alternative brand 
above gives the company a competitive available. This way a sure sale is lost 
freedom in fixing prices of its products. because goods were not available at 

the place where the customer wanted 
Physical Distribution to purchase. Thus, it is an important 
The fourth important e lement responsibility of the marketers to make 
of marketing mix is the physical the product physically available at a 
distribution of products and services. place where the customers would like 
Through this component of marketing them to buy. The physical handling 
mix, the goods and services are made and movement of goods from place of 
available at right place, at right time production to the place of distribution 
to right people without change. is referred to as physical distribution, 

Once goods are manufactured, which is a very important element of 
packaged, branded, priced, and marketing mix.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   269 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
270

Physical distribution covers all customers to the manufacturers. A 
the activities required to physically good physical distribution system 
move goods from manufacturers to should provide for an accurate and 
the customers. Important activities speedy processing of orders, in 
involved in the physical distribution the absence of which, goods would 
include transportation, warehousing, reach the customers late or in wrong 
material handling, and inventory quantity or specifications. This would 
control. These activities constitute result in customer dissatisfaction, 
major components of  physical with the danger of loss of business 
distribution. and goodwill.

2. Transportation: Transportation is 
Components of Physical the means of carrying goods and raw 
Distribution materials from the point of production 
The main components of physical to the point of sale. It is one of the major 
distribution are explained as follows: elements in the physical distribution 
1. Order Processing: In a typical of goods. It is important because 
buyer-seller relationship, order unless the goods are physically 
placement is the first step. Products made available, the sale cannot 
flow from manufacturers to customers be completed.
via channel members while orders 3. Warehousing: Warehousing refers 
flow in the reverse direction, from to the act of storing and assorting 

Nothing Beats Word of Mouth in India
Nothing sways an Indian buyer’s choice more than a word of reassurance from 
the people he knows. Even for the purchases like cars, mobile phones and home 
loans, majority of the consumers in India rely on the references from their friends 
and relatives while making their decisions.

The story is different in developed economies. Take the case of automobiles. 
In markets like the US, Canada and Japan, more people are influenced by 
conventional advertising by automobile companies, in developing markets like 
India, Malaysia and Thailand it’s the neighbour or the colleague who tips the 
scales one way or the other. “In case of luxury goods, the psyche of Indians has 
always been different. Buying a car is a family decision, so it is only natural that 
all the members of the family will talk to all the other users of a similar products, 
who they know”, General Motors India director P Balendran said.

When the whole world is going crazy with Internet and mobile marketing, it is 
interesting that for Indians it’s still conventional advertising and word of mouth 
campaigns that sways their choices. Unlike in the West, Indians come from a very 
closely-knit society where people get influenced by their peers, relatives and local 
celebrities. People are more than willing to accept a brand if it’s endorsed by their 
favourite superstar or is recommended by their close associates.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   270 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



MARkETING
271

products in order to create time level of inventory, higher will be the 
utility in them. The basic purpose of level of service to customers but the 
warehousing activities is to arrange cost of carrying the inventory will also 
placement of goods and provide be high because lot of capital would be 
facilities to store them. The need for tied up in the stock. Thus, a balance is 
warehousing arises because there to be maintained in respect of the cost 
may be difference between the time a and customer satisfaction. 
product is produced and the time it is 
required for consumption. Generally Promotion
the efficiency of a firm in serving its 
customers will depend on where these A company may produce a good quality 
warehouses are located and where are product, price it appropriately and 
these to be delivered. make it available at the selling points, 

Generally larger the number which are convenient to customers. But 
of warehouses a firm has, lesser in spite of all this, the product may not 
would be the time taken in serving sell well in the market. There is a need 
customers at different locations for developing proper communication 
but greater would be the cost of with the market. In the absence of 
warehousing and vice-versa. Thus communication, the customers would 
the firm has to strike a balance not be able to know about the product 
between the cost of warehousing and and how it can satisfy their needs and 
the level of customer service. wants or may not be convinced about 

For products requiring long- its utility and benefits.
term storage (such as agricultural Promotion refers to the use of 
products) the warehouses are located communication with the twin objective 
near production sites. This helps in of informing potential customers 
minimising the charges on transportation about a product and persuading them 
of the goods. On the other hand, the to buy it. In other words, promotion 
products which are bulky and hard to is an important element of marketing 
ship (machinery, automobiles) as well mix by which marketers makes use 
as perishable products (bakery, meat, of various tools of communication 
vegetables) are kept at different locations to encourage exchange of goods and 
near the market.
4. Inventory Control: Linked to services in the market.
warehousing decisions are the 
inventory decisions which hold key Promotion mix

to success for many manufacturers, Promotion mix refers to combination 
especially those where the per unit of promotional tools used by an 
cost is high. A very important decision o r g a n i s a t i o n  t o  a c h i e v e  i t s 
in respect of inventory is deciding communication objectives. Various 
about the level of inventory. Higher the tools of communication are used 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   271 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
272

 M C
 A U
 R  ADVERTISING PERSONAL SELLING S
 k T
 E  PUBLIC RELATIONS SALES PROMOTION O
 T M
 E E
 R Promotion Mix R

Marketing Communications

by the marketers to inform and Advertising is perhaps the most 
persuade customers about their commonly used tool of promotion. It is 
firm’s products. These include: (i) an impersonal form of communication, 
Advertising, (ii) Personal Selling, (iii) which is paid for by the marketers 
Sales Promotion, and (iv) Publicity. (sponsors) to promote some goods 
These tools are also called elements or service. The most common modes 
of promotion mix and can be used of advertising are  ‘newspapers’, 
in different combinations, to achieve ‘magazines’, ‘television’, and ‘radio’. 
the goals of promotion. For example, The important distinguishing features 
consumer goods firms may use of advertising are as follows:
more of advertising through mass (i) Paid Form: Advertising is a paid 
media while the industrial goods form of communication. That 
firms may be using more of personal is, the sponsor has to bear the 
selling. What combination of these cost of communicating with the 
elements is used by a firm will prospects.
depend upon various factors such 
as nature of market, nature product, (ii) Impersonality: There is no direct 
the promotions budget, objectives face-to-face contact between 
of promotion, etc. Let us first know the prospect and the advertiser. 
about these elements in some details. It is therefore, referred to as 

impersonal method of promotion. 
a Advertising creates a monologue 

Dvertising and not a dialogue.
We generally come across hundreds of (iii) Identified Sponsor: Advertising 
advertising messages everyday, which is undertaken by some identified 
tell us about various products such individual or company, who 
as toilet soaps, detergent powder, soft makes the advertising efforts and 
drinks and services such as hotels, also bears the cost of it.
insurance policies, etc.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   272 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



Marketing
273

Merits of advertising of goods and services, it attracts 
advertising, as a medium of communi- lot of criticism. the opponents of 

advertising say that the expenditure 
cation, has the following merits: on advertising is a social waste as it 
(i)  Mass Reach: advertising is a adds to the cost, multiplies the needs 

medium through which a large of people and undermines social 
number of people can be reached values. the proponents, however, 
over a vast geographical area. argue that advertising is very useful 
For example, an advertisement as it increases the reach, brings the 
message placed in a national daily pay unit cost of production down and 
reaches lakhs of its subscribers. adds to the growth of the economy. it 

(ii) Enhancing Customer Satisfaction is therefore, important to examine the 
and Confidence:  advertising major criticisms against advertising 
creates confidence amongst and see the extent to which these are 
prospective buyers as they feel true. this is taken up as follows:
more comfortable and assured 1. Adds to Cost: the opponents of 
about the product quality and advertising argue that advertising 
hence feel more satisfied. unnecessarily adds to the cost of 

(iii) E x p r e s s i v e n e s s :  W i t h  t h e product, which is ultimately passed 
developments in art, computer on to the buyers in the form of high 
designs, and graphics, advertising prices. an advertisement on tV, for 
has  deve loped into  one  o f a few seconds, for example, costs the 
the most forceful medium of marketers several lakhs of rupees. 
communication. With the special Similarly an advertisement in print 
effects that can be created, even media say in a newspaper or a magazine 
simple products and messages can costs the marketers a large amount of 
look very attractive. money. the money spent adds to the 

cost, which in an important factor in 
(iv) Economy: advertising is a very fixation of the price of a product.

economical mode of communication true, advertisement of a product 
if large number of people are to be costs lot of money but it helps to 
reached. Because of its wide reach, 
the overall cost of advertising increase the demand for the product 
gets spread over numerous as large number of potential buyers 
communication links established. come to know about the availability 
as a result the per-unit cost of of the products, its features, etc. and 
reach comes low. are persuaded to buy it. the increased 

demand leads to higher production, 
which brings with it the economies 

ObjectiOns tO Advertising of scale. as a result, the per unit cost 
though advertising is one of the most of production comes down as the 
frequently used medium of promotion total cost is divided by larger number 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   273 2/6/2024   10:12:03 AM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
274

of units. Thus, the expenditure on of tooth or ‘feelings of freshness’ in 
advertisement adds to the total cost competing brands of toothpaste that 
but the per unit cost comes down, it is sometimes confusing to us as to 
which in fact lessens the burden which one to buy.
of consumers rather than adding The supporters of advertisement, 
to it. however, argue that we are all rational 
2. Undermines Social Values: Another human beings who make our decisions 
important criticism of advertising for purchase of products on factors 
is that it undermines social values such as price, style, size, etc. Thus the 
and promotes materialism. It breeds buyers can clear their confusion by 
discontent among people as they come analysing the information provided on 
to know about new products and feel the advertisements and other sources 
dissatisfied with their present state before taking a decision to purchase 
of affairs. Some advertisements show a product. However, this criticism 
new life styles, which don’t find social cannot be completely overruled.
approval. 4. Encourages Sale of Inferior 

This criticism is not entirely true. Products: Advertising does not 
Advertisement in fact helps buyers distinguish between superior and 
by informing them about the new inferior products and persuade 
products, which may be improvement people to purchase even the inferior 
over the existing products. If the products.
buyers are not informed about these In fact superiority and inferiority 
products, they may be using inefficient depends on the quality, which is 
products. Further, the job of an a relative concept. The desired 
advertisement is to inform. The final level of quality will depend on the 
choice to buy or not to buy anyway economic status and preferences of 
rests with the buyers. They will buy if the target customers. Advertisements 
the advertised product satisfies some sell products of a given quality and 
of their needs. They may be motivated the buyers will buy if it suits their 
to work harder to be able to purchase requirements. No advertisement 
these products. should however, make false claim 
3. Confuses the Buyers: Another about the quality of a product. If a 
criticism against advertisement is that firm makes a false claims it can be 
so many products are being advertised prosecuted for the same.
which makes similar claims that the 
buyer gets confused as to which one Personal selling
is true and which one should be relied 
upon. For example, we may note similar Personal  se l l ing involves oral 
claims of whiteness or stain removing presentation of message in the form 
abilities in competing brands of of conversation with one or more 
detergent powder or claims of whiteness prospective customers for the purpose 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   274 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



MARkETING
275

of making sales. It is a personal form role of Personal selling
of communication. Companies appoint 
salespersons to contact prospective Personal selling plays a very important 
buyers  and create  awareness role in the marketing of goods and 

services. The importance of personal 
about the product and develop selling to businessmen, customers and 
product preferences with the aim of society may be described as below.
making sale.

Importance to Businessmen
Features of Personal selling

Personal selling is a powerful tool for 
(i)  Personal Form: In personal selling creating demand for a firm’s products 

a direct face-to-face dialogue takes and increasing their sale. The importance 
place that involves an interactive of personal selling to a business 
relationship between the seller and organisation may be described as follows:
the buyer. (i)   Effective Promotional Tool: Personal 

(ii)   Development of Relationship: Personal selling is very effective promotional 
selling allows a salesperson to tool, which helps in influencing 
develop personal relationships the prospects about the merits of 
with the prospective customers, a product and thereby increasing 
which may become important in its sale.
making sale. (ii) Flexible Tool: Personal selling is 

more flexible than other tools of 
Merits of Personal selling promotion such as advertising and 
(i) Flexibility: There is lot of flexibility sales promotion. It helps business 

persons in adopting their offer in 
in personal selling. The sales varying purchase situations.
presentation can be adjusted 
to fit the specific needs of the (iii) Minimises Wastage of Efforts: 
individual customers. Compared with other tools of 

promotion, the possibility of 
(ii) Direct Feedback: As there is direct wastage of efforts in personal 

face-to-face communication in selling is minimum. This helps 
personal selling, it is possible the business persons in bringing 
to take a direct feed back from economy in their efforts.
the customer and to adapt the (iv) Consumer Attention: There is an 
presentation according to the opportunity to detect the loss of 
needs of the prospects. consumer attention and interest 

(iii) Minimum Wastage: The wastage in a personal selling situation. 
of efforts in personal selling can This helps a business person in 
be minimised as company can successfully completing the sale.
decide the target customers before (v) Lasting Relationship: Personal 
making any contact with them. selling helps to develop lasting 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   275 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
276

relationship between the sales identifying their needs and wants 
persons and the customers, which and in knowing how these can best 
is very important for achieving the be satisfied.
objectives of business. (ii) La tes t  Market  In fo r mat ion : 

(vi) Personal Rapport: Development of Customers get latest market 
personal rapport with customers information regarding price 
increases the competitive strength changes, product availability 
of a business organisation. and shortages and new product 

(vii) Role in Introduction Stage: Personal introduction, which help them in 
selling plays very important role taking the purchase decisions in 
in the introduction stage of a new a better way.
product as it helps in persuading (iii) Expert Advice: Customers get 
customers about the merits of the expert advice and guidance in 
product. purchasing various goods and 

services, which help them in 
(viii) Link with Customers: Sales people making better purchase.

play three different roles, namely 
persuasive role, service role and (iv) Induces Customers:  Personal selling 
informative role, and thereby link induces customers to purchase 

new products that satisfy their 
a business firm to its customers. needs in a better way and thereby 

helps in improving their standards 
Importance to Customers of living.
This role of personal selling becomes 
more important for the illiterate and Importance to Society
rural customers, who do not have Personal selling plays a very productive 
many other means of getting product role in the economic progress of a 
information. society. The more specific benefits of 

The customers are benefited by personal selling to a society are as 
personal selling in the following follows:
ways: (i) Converts Latest Demand: Personal 
(i) Help in Identifying Needs: Personal selling converts latest demand into 

selling helps the customers in effective demand. It is through this 

Personal Selling
‘Most people think ‘selling’ is the same as ‘talking’. But the most effective 
salespeople know that listening is the most important part of their job.’

—Roy Bartell
‘You don’t close a sale, you open a relationship if you want to build a long-term, 
successful enterprise.’

—Patricia Fripp

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   276 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



Marketing
277

cycle that the economic activity in efforts such as advertising and 
the society is fostered, leading to personal selling.
more jobs, more incomes and more Companies use sales promotion tools 
products and services. that is how specifically designed to promote to 
economic growth is influenced by customers (e.g., free samples, discounts, 
personal selling. and contests), tradesmen or middlemen 

(ii) Employment Opportunities: Personal (e.g., cooperative advertising, dealer 
selling offers greater income and discounts and dealer incentives and 
employment opportunities to the contests) and to sales person (e.g., 
unemployed youth. bonus, salesmen contests, special 

(iii) Career Opportunities: Personal offers). Sales promotions include only 
selling provides attractive career those activities that are used to provide 
with greater opportunities for short term incentives to boost the sales 
advancement and job satisfaction of a firm.
as well as security, respect, variety, 
interest and independence to Merits of Sales Promotion
young men and women. (i) Attention Value: Sales promotion 

(iv) Mobility of Sales People: there is a activities attract attention of 
greater degree of mobility in sales the people because of the use of 
people, which promote travel and incentives.
tourism in the country.

(ii) Useful in New Product Launch: 
(v) Product Standardisation: Personal 

s e l l i n g  i n c r e a s e s  p r o d u c t Sales promotion tools can be very 
standardisation and uniformity effective at the time of introduction 
in consumption pattern in a of a new product in the market. it 
diverse society. induces people to break away from 

their regular buying behaviour 
SaleS P and try the new product.

romotion
(iii) Synergy in Total  Promotional 

Sales promotion refers to short- Efforts: Sales promotion activities 
term incentives, which are designed are designed to supplement the 
to encourage the buyers to make personal selling and advertising 
immediate purchase of a product or efforts used by a firm and add to 
service. these include all promotional the over all effectiveness of the 
efforts other than advertising, promotional efforts of a firm.
personal selling and publicity, used 
by a company to boost its sales. Sales Limitation of Sales Promotion
promotion activities include offering 
cash discounts, sales contests, free gift (i) Reflects Crisis: If a firm frequently 
offers, and free sample distribution. rely on sales promotion, it may 
Sales promotion is usually undertaken give the impression that it is 
to supplement other promotional unable to manage its sales 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   277 2/6/2024   10:54:03 AM



BUSineSS  StUDieS
278

or that there are no takers of Commonly used sales Promotion 
its product. activities

(ii) Spoils Product Image: Use of sales 
promotion tools may affect the 1. Rebate: Offering products at special 
image of a product. the buyers prices, to clear off excess inventory. 
may start feeling that the product example, a car manufacturer’s offer 
is not of good quality or is not to sell a particular brand of car at a 
appropriately priced. discount of ̀  10,000, for a limited period.

Sales Promotion

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   278 2/6/2024   10:54:04 AM



MARkETING
279

2. Discount: Offering products at draw coupon on purchase of easy 
less than list price. Example, a shoe undergarment and win a car offer.
company’s offer of ‘Discount Up to 8.Usable Benefit: Purchase goods 
50%’ or a shirt marketer’s offer of worth ` 3000 and get a holiday 
‘50+40% Discount’. package worth ` 3000 free’ or ‘Get 
3. Refunds: refunding a part of price a Discount Voucher for Accessories 
paid by customer on some proof of on Apparel Purchase of ` 1000 and 
purchase, say on return of empty foils or above.’
wrapper. This is commonly used by food 9. Full finance @ 0%: Many marketers 
product companies, to boost their sales. of consumer durables such as 
4. Product combinations: Offering Electronic goods, automobiles etc 
another product as gift along with the offer easy financing schemes such as 
purchase of a product, say offer of a ‘24 easy instalments, Eight Up Front 
pack of ½ kg of rice with the purchase and 16 To Be Paid as Post Dated 
of a bag of Aatta (wheat flour), or Cheques’. However, one should be 
‘Get 128 kB Memory Card Free with careful about the file charges, which 
a Digicam’ or Buy a TV of 25+ and sometimes is nothing but interest 
Get a Vacuum Cleaner Free’ or ‘100 recovered in advance.
Gm Bottle of Sauce Free With 1 kg 10. Sampling: Offer of free sample of 
Detergent.’ a product, say a detergent powder or 
5. Quantity gift: tooth paste to potential customers at 

 Offering extra 
quantity of the product commonly the time of launch of a new brand.
used by marketer of toiletry products. 11.Contests: Competitive events 
For example, a shaving cream’s offer of involving application of skills or 
‘40% extra’ or A Hotel’s offer of “Take luck, say salving a quiz or answering 
a 2 Night 3 Days Package At the Hotel some questions.
and Get an extra Night Stay At Just 
` 500” or ‘Buy 2 Get 1 Free’ offer of a Public relations
marketer of shirts. Managing public opinion of an 
6. Instant Draws and Assigned organisation is an important task which 
Gift: For example, ‘Scratch a Card’ or can be performed by the marketing 
‘Burst a Cracker’ and instantly win a department. The business needs to 
refrigerator, Car, T-shirt, Computer, communicate effectively to customers, 
with the purchase of a TV. suppliers, and dealers, since they are 
7. Lucky Draw: For example, the offer instrumental in increasing the sales 
of a bathing soap to win a gold coin and profit. Besides those who come into 
on lucky draw coupon for free petrol direct contact with the organisation or 
on purchase of certain quantity of its products, there are other members 
petrol from given petrol pump or lucky of the general public whose voice 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   279 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
280

or opinion is equally important. like an emergency to improve public 
This public may be interested in the image. The public relations department 
company and its product and have then has to do something drastic so 
an impact on the business ability to that damage to company’s images 
achieve its objectives. Thus, it becomes is controlled and minimised. They 
imperative to manage public opinion also advise top management to adopt 
and the company’s relation with the certain programmes which will add 
public on a regular basis. Therefore, to their public image and ensure that 
public relations involve a variety of negative publicity does not take place 
programmes designed to promote or at all.
protect a company’s image and its 
individual products in the eyes of the Role of Public Relations
public. The role of public relations can 

The business relates with a be discussed with respect to the 
number of groups including suppliers, functions which the department 
shareholders, intermediaries, activist performs. Public relations itself is an 
groups, and the government. For important tool in the hands of the 
example, active support of middlemen marketing department, which can be 
is needed if the firm wants to survive used to the advantage of the business. 
in a competitive selling environment. The public relations department 
Similarly, consumer activist groups performs five functions:
need to be satisfied because they can 1. Publicity: Publicity is similar 
impose restriction on the sales of the to advertising, in the sense 
firm’s products directly by urging that it is a non-personal form 
customers to refrain from buying them of communication. However, as 
or through the imposition of laws. Most against advertising it is a non-
organisations, business or otherwise paid form of communication. 
nowadays, have a separate department Publicity generally takes place 
to manage public relations. They may when favourable news is presented 
also utilize the services of any outside in the mass media about a 
public relations agency. product or service. For example, 

Their main task is to disseminate if a manufacturer achieves a 
information and build goodwill about breakthrough by developing a 
the business. Concrete steps are to be car engine, which runs on water 
taken to monitor the attitude of the instead of petrol, and this news 
general public and generate positive is covered by television or radio 
publicity. They are especially useful or newspapers in the form of a 
when there is negative publicity about news item. It would be termed 
the company or its products. At that as publicity because the engine 
time, the situation has to be tackled manufacturer would benefit from 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   280 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



MARkETING
281

such dissemination of information rely on these materials to reach 
about its achievement by the media and influence their target markets. 
but would not bear any cost for Speeches by the company’s 
the same. Thus, the two important executives at a meeting of trade 
features of publicity are that: associations or trade fairs can 

(i) Publicity is an unpaid form of really boost the company’s image. 
communication. It does not involve even interviews with TV channels 
any direct expenditure by the and responding to queries from the 
marketing firm; and media go a long way in promoting 

(ii) There is no identified sponsor for public relations.
the communication as the message 4. Lobbying: The organisation has 
goes as a news item. to deal with government officials 
In publicity, as the information and different ministers in charge of 

is disseminated by an independent corporate affairs, industry, finance 
source, e.g., the press in the form of with respect to policies relating 
news stories and features, the message to business and the economy. 
has more credibility than if that comes The government also seeks to 
as a sponsored message in advertising. maintain a healthy relationship 
2. Press release: Information about with associations of commerce 

the organisation needs to be and industry and solicits the 
presented in a positive manner opinion of major stakeholders while 
in the press. Generating news formulating industrial, telecom, 
requires skill in developing and taxation policies, etc. The public 
researching a story and getting the relations department then has to 
media to accept press releases is a be really proactive in promoting 
difficult task. The public relations or decoding regulations that affect 
department is in contact with the them.
media to present true facts and a 5. C o u n s e l l i n g :  T h e  p u b l i c 
correct picture about the company. relations department advises the 
Otherwise news can get distorted management on general issues 
if taken from other sources. which affect the public and the 

3. Corporate communication : position the company would like 
The image of the organisation to the take on a particular issue. 
needs to be promoted through The company can build goodwill 
communicating with the public by contributing money and time to 
and the employees within the certain causes like environment, 
organisation. This is usually done wildlife, children’s rights, education, 
with the help of newsletter, annual etc. Such cause-related activities 
reports, brochures, articles and help in promoting public relations 
audio-visual materials. Companies and building goodwill.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   281 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
282

The major differences between advertising and personal selling are as follows:

Difference between Advertising and Personal Selling

S.  Advertising Personal Selling
No.

 1. Advertising is an impersonal form of Personal selling is a personal form of 
communication. communication.

 2. Advertising involves transmission of In personal selling, the sales talk is 
standardised messages, i.e., same adjusted keeping view customer’s 
message is sent to all the customers background and needs.
in a market segment.

 3. Advertising is inflexible as the message Personal selling is highly flexible. as 
can’ t be adjusted to the needs of the the message can be adjusted.
buyer.

 4. It reaches masses, i.e., a large number Only a limited number of people can 
of people can be approached. be contacted because of time and cost 

considerations.
 5. In advertising the cost per person The cost per person is quite high in 

reached is very low. the case of personal selling.
 6. Advertising can cover the market in a Personal selling efforts take a lot of 

short time. time to cover the entire market.
 7. Advertising makes use of mass media Personal selling makes use of sales 

such television, radio, newspaper, and staff, which has limited reach.
magazines.

 8. Advertising lacks direct feedback. Personal selling provides direct and 
Marketing research efforts are needed immediate feed back. Sales persons 
to judge customers’ reactions to come to know about the customers’ 
advertising. reactions immediately.

 9. Advertising is more useful in creating Personal selling plays important role 
and building interest of the consumers at the awareness stage of decision 
in the firms products. making. 

 10. Advertising is more useful in marketing Personal selling is more helpful in 
to the ultimate consumer’s who are selling products to the industrial 
large in numbers. buyers or to imtermediaries such as 

dealers and retailers who are relatively 
few in numbers.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   282 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



Marketing
283

in addition, maintaining good (c) Stimulates sales force: it becomes 
public relations also helps in achieving easier for the sales force to deal 
the following marketing objectives: with the retailers and convince 
(a) Building awareness :  Public dealers if they have already heard 

relations department can place about the product in the news 
stories and dramatise the product before it is launched. retailers 
in the media. this will build and dealers also feel it is easier 
marketplace excitement before to sell the product to the ultimate 
the product reaches the market consumer.
or  media advert is ing takes (d) Lowers  promot ion  costs : 
place. this usually creates a Maintaining good public relations 
favourable impression on the costs much less than advertising 
target customer. and direct mail. However, it 

(b) Building credibility: if news about requires a lot of communication 
a product comes in the media and interpersonal  ski l ls  to 
whether print or electronic it always convince the media to give space 
lends credibility and people believe or time for the organisation and 
in the product since it is in the news. its product.

Key Terms

Marketing trade Mark  Labelling  
Marketing Management Marketing Mix advertising  
Channels of Distribution Physical Distribution Publicity  
Consumer Product Sales Promotion Promotion Mix 
Convenience Product Shopping Product Personal Selling 
Public relations Brand   

SUMMARY
in the traditional sense, the term ‘market’ refers to the place where buyers 
and sellers gather to enter into transactions involving the exchange of goods 
and services. But in modern marketing sense, it refers to a set of actual and 
potential buyers of a product or service.

Marketing: the term marketing has been described as performance of business 
activities that direct the flow of goods and services from producers to consumers. 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   283 2/20/2024   03:57:12 PM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
284

Marketing is not merely a post-production activity. It includes many activities 
that are performed even before goods are actually produced and continue even 
after the goods have been sold.

Functions of Marketing: The important functions of marketing include 
Gathering and Analysing Market Information, Marketing Planning, Product 
Designing and Development, Standardisation and Grading, Packaging and 
Labelling, Branding, Customer Support Services, Pricing of Products, Promotion, 
Physical distribution, Transportation, Storage or Warehousing.

Role of Marketing: By adopting marketing orientation, an organisation whether 
profit making or non-profit making, can achieve its goals in the most effective 
manner. Also marketing acts as a catalyst in the economic development of a 
country and helps in raising the standards of living of people.

Marketing Mix: is a set of marketing tools that the firm uses to pursue its 
marketing objectives in a target market. The variables or elements of marketing 
mix have been classified in to four categories, popularly known as four Ps 
of marketing viz., Product, Price, Place and Promotion. These elements are 
combined to create an offer.

Product In common parlance, the word ‘product’, is used to refer only to the 
physical or tangible attributes of a product. In marketing, product is a mixture 
of tangible and intangible attributes, which are capable of being exchanged for a 
value, with ability to satisfy customer needs. It is anything that can be offered to 
a market to satisfy a want or need. Products may broadly be classified into two 
categories—industrial products and consumers’ products. Products, which are 
purchased, by the ultimate consumers or users for satisfying their personal needs 
and desires are referred to as consumer products. On the basis of shopping efforts 
involved, the products are classified as Convenience Product, Shopping Products 
and Speciality Products. On the basis of their durability, consumer products have 
been classified into categories—Durable, Non-durable, and Services.
Those activities, benefits or satisfactions, which are offered for sale, e.g., dry 
cleaning, watch repairs, hair cutting, are called services.
Industrial products are those products, which are used as inputs in producing 
other products. These are broadly classified in to (i) Materials and Parts, 
(ii) Capital Items, and (iii) Supplies and Business Services.

Packaging: The act of designing and producing the container or wrapper 
of a product is referred as packaging. There can be three different levels of 
packaging viz., Primary package, Secondary packaged, Transport package. 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   284 2/6/2024   11:28:52 AM



MARkETING
285

Packaging performs a number of functions in the marketing of goods. Some 
of the important functions, include Product identification; Product protection; 
Facilitating the use of the product and Promotion of goods and services.

Labelling: A simple looking but important task in the marketing of goods 
relates to designing the label to be put on the package. The label may vary 
from a simple tag attached to the product to complex graphics that are part 
of the package. The most important functions of labels include i) describing 
the product ii) help in identifying the product or brand; iii) help in grading the 
products into different categories; and aids in promotion of the products.

Pricing: Price may be defined as the amount of money paid by a buyer or 
received by a seller in consideration of the purchase of a product or service. 
Generally, if the price of a product is increased, its demand comes down, and 
vice-versa. Pricing is considered to be an effective competitive weapon. It is also 
the single most important factor affecting the revenue and profits of a firm.
The factors affecting price determination are (i) Product Cost (ii) The Utility 
and Demand (iii) Competition (iv) Government and Legal regulations and (v) 
Marketing Methods Used.

Physical Distribution: There are two important decisions relating to this aspect- 
one regarding physical movement of goods and two, regarding the channels. 
Physical Distribution covers all the activities required to physically move 
goods from manufacturers to the customers. The main component of physical 
distribution are (i) Order Processing; (ii) Transportation; (iii) Warehousing; and 
(iv). Inventory Control: Just-in-Time-Inventory.

Promotion: Promotion refers to the use of communication with the twin 
objective of informing potential customers about a product and persuading 
them to buy it. There are four major tools, or elements of promotion mix, 
which are — (i) Advertising, (ii) Personal Selling, (iii) Sales Promotion, and (iv) 
Publicity. These tools are used in different combinations to achieve the goals 
of promotion.

Advertising is the most commonly used tool of promotion. It is an impersonal 
form of communication, which is paid for by the marketers (Sponsors) to 
promote some goods or service. The merits of advertising, as a medium of 
communication, include (i) Mass reach; (ii) Enhancing customer satisfaction 
and confidence; (iii) Expressiveness; and (iv) Economy.
The limitations of advertising are that it is (i) less forceful (ii) lacks Feedback (iii) 
inflexibility (iv) low effectiveness. The most common Objections to Advertising 

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   285 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
286

are that it (i) adds to cost; (ii) undermines social Values; (iii) confuses the buyers; 
and (iv) encourages sale of Inferior Products.
Most of the criticisms against advertising are not fully true. Advertising is 
therefore considered an essential function of marketing.

Personal selling involves oral presentation of message in the form of 
conversation with one or more prospective customers for the purpose of making 
sales. Personal Selling plays important role for the business persons as well 
as for the society.

Sales Promotion refers to short-term incentives, which are designed to 
encourage the buyers to make immediate purchase of a product service. 
These include promotional efforts other than advertising, personal selling 
and publicity, used by a company to boost its sales. Commonly used Sales 
Promotion Activities include rebate, Discount, refunds, Product Combinations, 
Quantity Gift, Instant Draws and Assigned Gift, Lucky Draw, Usable Benefit, 
Full Finance @ 0%, sampling, and contests.
Publicity is similar to advertising, in the sense that it is a non-personal form 
of communication. However, as against advertising it is a non-paid form 
of communication. In publicity, as the information is disseminated by an 
independent source. However, an important limitation of publicity is that as a 
medium of promotion, it is not within the control of a marketing firm.

Public Relations: It is about managing organisations image in the eyes of all 
stake holders. It has five components publicity, public relations, corporate 
communication, lobbying and counselling.

EXERCISES

Very Short Answer Type
1. State any two advantages of branding to marketers of goods and services?
2. How does branding help in differential pricing?
3. What is the societal concept of marketing?
4. Enlist the advantages of packaging of consumer products.
5. List five shopping products purchased by you or your family during the 

last few months.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   286 2/6/2024   11:03:15 AM



MArkETINg
287

6. A marketer of colour TV having 20% of the current market share of the 
country aims at enhancing the market share to 50 per cent in next three 
years. For achieving this objective he specified an action programme. Name 
the function of marketing being discussed above. (Ans. Marketing planning.)

Short Answer Type
1. What is marketing? What functions does it perform in the process of 

exchange of goods and services? Explain.
2. Distinguish between the product concept and production concept of 

marketing.
3. Product is a bundle of utilities. Explain.
4. What are industrial products? How are they different from consumer 

products? Explain.
5. Distinguish between convenience product and shopping product.
6. Describe the functions of labeling in the marketing of products.
7. Discuss the role of intermediaries in the distribution of consumer 

non-durable products.
8. Define advertising? What are its main features? Explain.
9. Discuss the role of ‘sales promotion’ as an element of promotion mix.

10. As the marketing manager of a big hotel located at an important  
tourist destination, what societal concerns would be faced by you and 
what steps would you plan to take care of these concerns? Discuss.

11. What information is generally placed on the package of a food product? 
Design a label for one of the food products of your choice.

12. For buyers of consumer durable products, what ‘customer care services’ 
would you plan as a manager of a firm marketing new brand of motorcycle. 
Discuss.

Long Answer Type
1. What is marketing concept? How does it help in the effective marketing 

ofgoods and services.
2. What is marketing mix? What are its main elements? Explain.
3. How does branding help in creating product differentiation? Does it help 

in marketing of goods and services? Explain.
4. What are the factors affecting determination of the price of a product or 

service? Explain.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   287 2/6/2024   11:03:15 AM



BUSINESS  STUDIES
288

5. Explain the major activities involved in the physical distribution of 
products.

6. ‘Expenditure on advertising is a social waste.’ Do you agree? Discuss.
7. Distinguish between advertising and personal selling.
8. Explain the factors determining the choice of channel of distribution.

Project Work
Identify a product or service for a new launch for attracting potential 
consumers for your product. Prepare a project file to—

(a) Advertise the product or service selected.
(b) Write a Press Release for the launch of new product or service.
(c) Publicity of your product as a PR tool.

2024-25

Ch_10.indd   288 1/23/2024   05:45:41 PM