256 chemistry

uniT 8

Organic chemistry – sOme Basic  
PrinciPles and Techniques

In the previous unit you have learnt that the element 
carbon has the unique property called catenation due to 
which it forms covalent bonds with other carbon atoms. 

After studying this unit, you will It also forms covalent bonds with atoms of other elements 
be able to like hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus 
• unde r s t and  r easons  f o r and halogens. The resulting compounds are studied 

tetravalence of carbon and under a separate branch of chemistry called organic 
shapes of organic molecules; chemistry. This unit incorporates some basic principles 

• write structures of organic and techniques of analysis required for understanding the 
molecules in various ways; formation and properties of organic compounds.

• classify the organic compounds; 
• name the compounds according 8.1 General inTroducTion

to IUPAC system of nomenclature 
and also derive their structures Organic compounds are vital for sustaining life on earth 
from the given names; and include complex molecules like genetic information 

• understand the concept of bearing deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and proteins that 
organic reaction mechanism; constitute essential compounds of our blood, muscles and 

• explain the influence of electronic skin. Organic compounds appear in materials like clothing, 
displacements on structure and fuels, polymers, dyes and medicines. These are some of 
reactivity of organic compounds; the important areas of application of these compounds.

• recognise the types of organic Science of organic chemistry is about two hundred 
reactions; years old. Around the year 1780, chemists began to 

• l ea r n  the  t echn iques  o f distinguish between organic compounds obtained from 
p u r i f i c a t i o n  o f  o r g a n i c plants and animals and inorganic compounds prepared 
compounds; from mineral sources. Berzilius, a Swedish chemist 

• write the chemical reactions proposed that a ‘vital force’ was responsible for the 
involved in the qualitative formation of organic compounds. However, this notion 
analysis of organic compounds;

• was rejected in 1828 when F. Wohler synthesised an 
 understand the principles 

involved in quantitative analysis organic compound, urea from an inorganic compound, 
of organic compounds. ammonium cyanate.

NH4CNO     NH2CONH2

Ammonium cyanate          Urea
The pioneering synthesis of acetic acid by Kolbe 

(1845) and that of methane by Berthelot (1856) showed 
conclusively that organic compounds could be synthesised 
from inorganic sources in a laboratory.

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   256 2/24/2023   16:52:17



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 257

The development of electronic theory of Thus, in H2C=CH2 molecule all the atoms 
covalent bonding ushered organic chemistry must be in the same plane. The p orbitals are 
into its modern shape. mutually parallel and both the p orbitals are 

8.2 tetraValence OF carBOn:  perpendicular to the plane of the molecule. 
shaPes OF Organic cOmPOunds Rotation of one CH2 fragment with respect 

to other interferes with maximum overlap 
8.2.1 The Shapes of Carbon Compounds  of p orbitals and, therefore, such rotation 
The knowledge of fundamental concepts of about carbon-carbon double bond (C=C) is 
molecular structure helps in understanding restricted. The electron charge cloud of the π 
and predicting the properties of organic bond is located above and below the plane of 
compounds. You have already learnt theories bonding atoms. This results in the electrons 
of valency and molecular structure in Unit 4. being easily available to the attacking 
Also, you already know that tetravalence of reagents. In general, π bonds provide the most 
carbon and the formation of covalent bonds reactive centres in the molecules containing 
by it are explained in terms of its electronic multiple bonds.
configuration and the hybridisation of s and p 
orbitals. It may be recalled that formation and Problem 8.1
the shapes of molecules like methane (CH4), 
ethene (C2H4), ethyne (C How many σ and π bonds are present in 

2H2) are explained 
in terms of the use of sp3, sp2 and sp hybrid each of the following molecules?
orbitals by carbon atoms in the respective (a) HC≡CCH=CHCH3 (b) CH2=C=CHCH
molecules. 3 

solution
Hybridisation influences the bond length 

and bond enthalpy (strength) in compounds. (a) σC – C: 4; σC–H : 6; πC=C :1; π C≡C:2
The sp hybrid orbital contains more s (b) σC – C: 3; σC–H: 6; πC=C: 2.
character and hence it is closer to its nucleus 
and forms shorter and stronger bonds than Problem 8.2
the sp3 hybrid orbital. The sp2 hybrid orbital What is the type of hybridisation of each 
is intermediate in s character between sp carbon in the following compounds? 
and sp3 and, hence, the length and enthalpy 
of the bonds it forms, are also intermediate (a) CH3Cl, (b) (CH3)2CO, (c) CH3CN, 
between them. The change in hybridisation (d) HCONH2, (e) CH3CH=CHCN
affects the electronegativity of carbon. The solution
greater the s character of the hybrid orbitals, 
the greater is the electronegativity. Thus, a (a) sp3, (b) sp3, sp2, (c) sp3, sp, (d) sp2, (e) 
carbon atom having an sp hybrid orbital with sp3, sp2, sp2, sp
50% s character is more electronegative than Problem 8.3
that possessing  sp2 or sp3 hybridised orbitals. 
This relative electronegativity is reflected in Write the state of  hybridisation of carbon 
several physical and chemical properties of in the following compounds and shapes 
the molecules concerned, about which you of each of the molecules. 
will learn in later units. (a) H2C=O, (b) CH3F, (c) HC≡N.
8.2.2  some characteristic Features of π solution

Bonds
(a) sp2 hybridised carbon, trigonal planar; 

In a π (pi) bond formation, parallel orientation (b) sp3 hybridised carbon, tetrahedral; (c) 
of the two p orbitals on adjacent atoms is sp hybridised carbon, linear.
necessary for a proper sideways overlap. 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   257 10/10/2022   10:37:28 AM



258 chemistry

8.3  structural rePresentatiOns Similarly, CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3 
OF Organic cOmPOunds can be further condensed to CH3(CH2)6CH3. 

8.3.1  complete, condensed and Bond-line For further simplification, organic chemists 
structural Formulas use another way of representing the 

Structures of organic compounds are structures, in which only lines are used. 

represented in several ways. The In this bond-line structural representation 
Lewis 

structure or dot structure, dash structure, o f  organic  compounds,  carbon and 

condensed structure and bond line structural hydrogen atoms are not shown and the 

formulas are some of the specific types. The lines representing carbon-carbon bonds are 

Lewis structures, however, can be simplified drawn in a zig-zag fashion. The only atoms 

by representing the two-electron covalent specifically written are oxygen, chlorine, 

bond by a dash (–). Such a structural formula nitrogen etc. The terminals denote methyl 

focuses on the electrons involved in bond (–CH3) groups (unless indicated otherwise by 

formation.  A single dash represents a single a functional group), while the line junctions 

bond, double dash  is used for double bond denote carbon atoms bonded to appropriate 

and a triple dash represents triple bond. Lone- number of hydrogens required to satisfy the 

pairs of electrons on heteroatoms (e.g., oxygen, valency of the carbon atoms. Some of the 

nitrogen, sulphur, halogens etc.) may or may examples are represented as follows:

not be shown. Thus, ethane (C2H6), ethene (i) 3-Methyloctane can be represented in 
(C2H4), ethyne (C2H2) and methanol (CH3OH) various forms as:
can be represented by the following structural (a)   CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH2CH
formulas. Such structural representations are 3

                     |
called complete structural formulas.                    CH3 

(b)

       Ethane                  Ethene               

(c)

   Ethyne              Methanol

These structural formulas can be further 
abbreviated by omitting some or all of the 
dashes representing covalent bonds and by (ii) Various ways of representing 2-bromo 
indicating the number of identical groups butane are:
attached to an atom by a subscript. The 
resulting expression of the compound is 
called a condensed structural formula. Thus, 

(a)  CH3CHBrCH2CH3  (b)  
ethane, ethene, ethyne and methanol can be 
written as:
CH3CH3        H2C=CH2       HC≡CH            CH3OH 
Ethane       Ethene         Ethyne      Methanol (c)  

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   258 10/10/2022   10:37:29 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 259

In cyclic compounds, the bond-line formulas 
may be given as follows:

(b) 

solution
Condensed formula:

Cyclopropane (a) HO(CH2)3CH(CH3)CH(CH3)2
(b) HOCH(CN)2
Bond-line formula:

(a)

Cyclopentane

(b)

chlorocyclohexane

Problem 8.6
Problem 8.4

Expand each of the following bond-line 
Expand each of the following condensed formulas to show all the atoms including 
formulas into their complete structural carbon and hydrogen
formulas. (a)
(a) CH3CH2COCH2CH3

(b) CH3CH=CH(CH2)3CH3

solution (b)

(a) 
(c)

(b)  (d)

solution

Problem 8.5
For each of the following compounds, 
write a  condensed formula and also their 
bond-line formula.

(a) HOCH2CH2CH2CH(CH3)CH(CH3)CH3

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   259 10/10/2022   10:37:30 AM



260 chemistry

Molecular Models
Molecular models are physical devices 
that are used for a better visualisation and 
perception of three-dimensional shapes 
of organic molecules. These are made of 
wood, plastic or metal and are commercially 
available. Commonly three types of molecular 
models are used: (1) Framework model, (2) 
Ball-and-stick model, and (3) Space filling 
model. In the framework model only the 
bonds connecting the atoms of a molecule 
and not the atoms themselves are shown. 
This model emphasizes the pattern of 
bonds of a molecule while ignoring the size 
of atoms. In the ball-and-stick model, both 
the atoms and the bonds are shown. Balls 
represent atoms and the stick denotes a 
bond. Compounds containing C=C (e.g., 

8.3.2  Three-Dimensional ethene) can best be represented by using 
springs in place of sticks. These models are 

Representation of Organic referred to as ball-and-spring model. The 
Molecules space-filling model emphasises the relative 

The three-dimensional (3-D) structure of size of each atom based on its van der Waals 
organic molecules can be represented on radius. Bonds are not shown in this model. 
paper by using certain conventions. For It conveys the volume occupied by each atom 
example, by using solid ( ) and dashed in the molecule. In addition to these models, 

( ) wedge formula, the 3-D image of a computer graphics can also be used for 
molecular modelling. 

molecule from a two-dimensional picture 
can be perceived. In these formulas the 
solid-wedge is used to indicate a bond 
projecting out of the plane of paper, towards 
the observer. The dashed-wedge is used to 
depict the bond projecting out of the plane of 
the paper and away from the observer. Wedges 
are shown in such a way that the broad end of 
the wedge is towards the observer. The bonds  Framework model  Ball and stick model
lying in plane of the paper are depicted by 
using a normal line (—). 3-D representation of 
methane molecule on paper has been shown 
in Fig. 8.1 

Space filling model

Fig. 8.2
Fig. 8.1 Wedge-and-dash representation of CH

4

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   260 11/10/2022   15:19:57



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 261

8.4 ClassifiCation of organiC (homocyclic).
Compounds

The existing large number of organic 
compounds and their ever -increasing 
numbers has made it necessary to classify 
them on the basis of their structures. Organic Cyclopropane Cyclohexene Cyclohexane
compounds are broadly classified as follows:

Sometimes atoms other than carbon are 
also present in the ring (heterocylic). 
Tetrahydrofuran given below is an example 
of this type of compound:

                        

Tetrahydrofuran
These exhibit some of the properties similar 
to those of aliphatic compounds.

(b) aromatic compounds
Aromatic compounds are special types of 
compounds. You will learn about these 
compounds in detail in Unit 9. These include 
benzene and other related ring compounds 
(benzenoid). Like alicyclic compounds, 
aromatic comounds may also have hetero 
atom in the ring. Such compounds are called 

i. Acyclic or open chain compounds hetrocyclic aromatic compounds. Some of 
the examples of various types of aromatic 

These compounds are also called as aliphatic compounds are:
compounds and consist of straight or 
branched chain compounds, for example: Benzenoid aromatic compounds

CH3CH3

Ethane

Isobutane
Benzene          Aniline            Naphthalene

Non-benzenoid compound

Acetaldehyde Acetic acid

ii Cyclic or closed chain or ring 
compounds

(a) alicyclic compounds Tropone
Alicyclic (aliphatic cyclic) compounds contain 
carbon atoms joined in the form of a ring  

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   261 11/10/2022   15:20:58



262 chemistry

Heterocyclic aromatic compounds so because it is found in citrus fruits and the 
acid found in red ant is named formic acid 
since the Latin word for ant is formica. These 
names are traditional and are considered 
as trivial or common names. Some common 

   Furan             Thiophene            Pyridine names are followed even today. For example, 
Organic compounds can also be classified Buckminsterfullerene is a common name 

on the basis of functional groups, into families given to the newly discovered C60 cluster (a 
or homologous series. form of carbon) noting its structural similarity 
8.4.1 functional group to the geodesic domes popularised by the 

famous architect R. Buckminster Fuller. 
The functional group is an atom  or a group Common names are useful and in many 
of atoms joined to the carbon chain which is cases indispensable, particularly when the 
responsible for the characteristic chemical alternative systematic names are lengthy and 
properties of the organic compounds. The complicated. Common names of some organic 
examples are hydroxyl group (–OH), aldehyde compounds are given in Table 8.1. 
group (–CHO) and carboxylic acid group (–
COOH) etc. table 8.1 Common or trivial names of some 

organic Compounds
8.4.2 Homologous series
A group or a series of organic compounds each 
containing a characteristic functional group 
forms a homologous series and the members of 
the series are called homologues. The members 
of a homologous series can be represented by 
general molecular formula and the successive 
members differ from each other in molecular 
formula by a –CH2 unit. There are a number 
of homologous series of organic compounds. 
Some of these are alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, 
haloalkanes, alkanols, alkanals, alkanones, 
alkanoic acids, amines etc.
 It is also possible that a compound contains 
two or more identical or different functional 
groups. This gives rise to polyfunctional 
compounds.
8.5  nomEnClaturE of organiC 

Compounds
Organic chemistry deals with millions of 8.5.1  the iupaC system of nomenclature
compounds. In order to clearly identify A systematic name of an organic compound 
them, a systematic method of naming has is generally derived by identifying the parent 
been developed and is known as the iupaC hydrocarbon and the functional group(s) 
(international union of pure and applied 
Chemistry) system of nomenclature. In this attached to it. See the example given below. 
systematic nomenclature, the names are 
correlated with the structure such that the 
reader or listener can deduce the structure 
from the name. 
 Before the IUPAC system of nomenclature, 
however, organic compounds were assigned 
names based on their origin or certain 
properties. For instance, citric acid is named 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   262 11/10/2022   15:20:58



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 263

By further using prefixes and suffixes, the In order to name such compounds, the names 
parent name can be modified to obtain the of alkyl groups are prefixed to the name of 
actual name. Compounds containing carbon parent alkane. An alkyl group is derived 
and hydrogen only are called hydrocarbons. from a saturated hydrocarbon by removing 
A hydrocarbon is termed saturated if it a hydrogen atom from carbon.  Thus, CH4 
contains only carbon-carbon single bonds. becomes  -CH3 and is called methyl group. An 
The IUPAC name for a homologous series of alkyl group is named by substituting ‘yl’ for 
such compounds is alkane. Paraffin (Latin: ‘ane’ in the corresponding alkane. Some alkyl 
little affinity) was the earlier name given to groups are listed in Table 8.3.
these compounds. Unsaturated hydrocarbons table 8.3  some alkyl groups
are those, which contain at least one carbon-
carbon double or triple bond. 

8.5.2 iuPac nomenclature of  alkanes
Straight chain hydrocarbons: The names 
of such compounds are based on their chain 
structure, and end with suffix ‘-ane’ and carry 
a prefix indicating the number of carbon 
atoms present in the chain (except from CH4 
to C4H10, where the prefixes are derived from 
trivial names). The IUPAC names of some 
straight chain saturated hydrocarbons are 
given in Table 8.2. The alkanes in Table  Abbreviations are used for some alkyl 

groups. For example, methyl is abbreviated as 
8.2 differ from each other by merely the Me, ethyl as Et, propyl as Pr and butyl as Bu. 
number of -CH2 groups in the chain. They are The alkyl groups can be branched also. Thus, 
homologues of alkane series. propyl and butyl groups can have branched 
table 8.2 iuPac names of some unbranched structures as shown below. 

Saturated Hydrocarbons CH3-CH- CH3-CH2-CH-      CH3-CH-CH2- 
                                                                   

CH CH
3 3 CH3

Isopropyl- sec-Butyl- Isobutyl-
       CH3            CH3

               
CH3-C-           CH3-C-CH2-

               
CH3                     CH3

tert-Butyl-            Neopentyl-

Branched chain hydrocarbons: In a  Common branched groups have specific 
branched chain compound small chains of trivial names. For example, the propyl groups 
carbon atoms are attached at one or more can either be n-propyl group or isopropyl 
carbon atoms of the parent chain. The small group. The branched butyl groups are called 
carbon chains (branches) are called alkyl sec-butyl, isobutyl and tert-butyl group. 
groups. For example: We also encounter the structural unit, 

–CH2C(CH3)3, which is called neopentyl group.
CH3–CH–CH2–CH3  CH3–CH–CH2–CH–CH3

                Nomenclature of branched chain alkanes: 
CH We encounter a number of branched chain 

3              CH2CH3   CH3 alkanes. The rules for naming them are given 
(a) (b) below.

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   263 10/10/2022   10:37:31 AM



264 chemistry

1. First of all, the longest carbon chain in separated from the groups by hyphens 
the molecule is identified. In the example and there is no break between methyl 
(I) given below, the longest chain has nine and nonane.] 
carbons and it is considered as the parent 4. If two or more identical substituent 
or root chain. Selection of parent chain as groups are present then the numbers 
shown in (II) is not correct because it has are separated by commas. The names of 
only eight carbons. identical substituents are not repeated, 

instead prefixes such as di (for 2), tri 
(for 3), tetra (for 4), penta (for 5), hexa (for 
6) etc. are used. While writing the name 
of the substituents in alphabetical order, 
these prefixes, however, are not considered. 
Thus, the following compounds are 
named as: 

 CH3 CH3 CH3 CH3
      
CH3-CH-CH2-CH-CH3 CH3 C CH2CH CH3
 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5

2. The carbon atoms of the parent chain are 2,4-Dimethylpentane 2,2,4-Trimethylpentane

numbered to identify the parent alkane   H3C H2C CH3
and to locate the positions of the carbon       
atoms at which branching takes place due   CH3CH2CHCCH2CH2CH3
to the substitution of alkyl group in place   1 2 3 4 5 6 7
of hydrogen atoms. The numbering is      CH3
done in such a way that the branched  3-Ethyl-4,4-dimethylheptane 
carbon atoms get the lowest possible 
numbers. Thus, the numbering in the 5. If the two substituents are found in 
above example should be from left to right equivalent positions, the lower number 
(branching at carbon atoms 2 and 6) and is given to the one coming first in the 
not from right to left (giving numbers alphabetical listing. Thus, the following 
4 and  8 to the carbon atoms at which compound is 3-ethyl-6-methyloctane and 
branches are attached). not 6-ethyl-3-methyloctane.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
      CH3 — CH2—CH—CH2—CH2—CH—CH2 —CH3 
 C    CC       

   CH2CH
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 3  CH3 

C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C 6. The branched alkyl groups can be 
     named by following the above mentioned 

  C   C  C procedures. However, the carbon atom 
3. The names of  alkyl groups attached of the branch that attaches to the root 

as a branch are then prefixed to the alkane is numbered 1 as exemplified 
name of the parent alkane and position below. 
of the substituents is indicated by the 4 3 2 1 
appropriate numbers. If different alkyl 
groups are present, they are listed in CH3–CH–CH2–CH–  

alphabetical order. Thus, name for the    
compound shown above is: 6-ethyl-2-   CH3 CH3 
methylnonane. [Note: the numbers are  1,3-Dimethylbutyl-

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   264 10/10/2022   10:37:31 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 265

The name of such branched chain alkyl group Cyclic Compounds: A saturated monocyclic 
is placed in parenthesis while naming the compound is named by prefixing ‘cyclo’ to the 
compound. While writing the trivial names corresponding straight chain alkane. If side 
of substituents’ in alphabetical order, the chains are present, then the rules given above 
prefixes iso- and neo- are considered to be are applied. Names of some cyclic compounds 
the part of the fundamental name of alkyl are given below. 
group. The prefixes sec- and tert- are not 
considered to be the part of the fundamental 
name. The use of iso and related common 
prefixes for naming alkyl groups is also 
allowed by the IUPAC nomenclature as long 
as these are not further substituted. In multi-
substituted compounds, the following rules 
may aso be remembered:
•	 If	there	happens	to	be	two	chains	of	equal	

size, then that chain is to be selected which 
contains more number of side chains.

3-Ethyl-1,1-dimethylcyclohexane                 
•	 After	 selection	 of	 the	 chain,	 numbering	 (not 1-ethyl-3,3-dimethylcyclohexane)

is to be done from the end closer to the 
substituent.     Problem 8.7

Structures and IUPAC names of some 
hydrocarbons are given below. Explain 
why the names given in the parentheses 
are incorrect.

2,5,6- Trimethyloctane 
[and not 3,4,7-Trimethyloctane] 

5-(2-Ethylbutyl)-3,3-dimethyldecane 
 [and not 5-(2,2-Dimethylbutyl)-3-ethyldecane]    

3-Ethyl-5-methylheptane 
[and not 5-Ethyl-3-methylheptane]

Solution
(a) Lowest locant number, 2,5,6 is 
lower than 3,5,7, (b) substituents are 

5-sec-Butyl-4-isopropyldecane in	equivalent	position;	lower	number	is	
given to the one that comes first in the 
name according to alphabetical order.

8.5.3 Nomenc l a tu re  o f  O rgan i c 
Compounds having Functional 
Group(s)

A functional group, as defined earlier, is an 
atom or a group of atoms bonded together in 

5-(2,2-Dimethylpropyl)nonane a	unique	manner	which	is	usually	the	site	of	

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   265 10/27/2022   2:13:15 PM



266 chemistry

chemical reactivity in an organic molecule. class suffix. In such cases the full name of the 
Compounds having the same functional parent alkane is written before the class suffix. 
group undergo similar reactions. For example, For example CH2(OH)CH2(OH) is named as 
CH3OH, CH3CH2OH, and (CH3)2CHOH — ethane–1,2–diol. However, the ending – ne of 
all having -OH functional group liberate the parent alkane is dropped  in the case of 
hydrogen on reaction with sodium metal. compounds having more than  one  double or 
The presence of functional groups enables triple bond; for example, CH2=CH-CH=CH2 is 
systematisation of organic compounds into named as buta–1,3–diene.
different classes. Examples of some functional 
groups with their prefixes and suffixes along Problem 8.8
with some examples of organic compounds Write the IUPAC names of the compounds  
possessing these are given in Table 8.4. i-iv from their given structures.

First of all, the functional group present 
in the molecule is identified which determines 
the choice of appropriate suffix. The longest 
chain of carbon atoms containing the 
functional group is numbered in such a way 
that the functional group is attached at the solution 
carbon atom possessing lowest possible • The functional group present is an 
number in the chain. By using the suffix as alcohol (OH). Hence the suffix is ‘-ol’.
given in Table 8.4, the name of the compound • The longest chain containing -OH 
is arrived at. has eight carbon atoms. Hence the  

In the case of polyfunctional compounds, corresponding saturated hydrocar-
one of the functional groups is chosen as the bon is octane.
principal functional group and the compound • The -OH is on carbon atom 3. In  
is then named on that basis. The remaining addition, a methyl group is attached 
functional groups, which are subordinate at 6th carbon.
functional groups, are named as substituents   Hence, the systematic name of this 
using the appropriate prefixes. The choice of compound is 6-Methyloctan-3-ol.
principal functional group is made on the basis 
of order of preference. The order of decreasing 
priority for some functional groups is: 
-cOOh, –sO3h, -cOOr (r=alkyl group), cOcl, 
-CONH2, -cn,-hc=O,  >c=O, -Oh, -nh2, > 
c=c<,  -c≡C- . solution
The –R, C6H5-, halogens (F, Cl, Br, I), –NO2, The functional group present is ketone 
alkoxy (–OR) etc.  are always pref ix (>C=O), hence suffix ‘-one’. Presence 
substituents. Thus, a compound containing of two keto groups is indicated by ‘di’, 
both an alcohol and a keto group is named hence suffix becomes ‘dione’. The two 
as hydroxyalkanone since the keto group is keto groups are at carbons 2 and 4. 
preferred to the hydroxyl group. The longest chain contains 6 carbon 

For example, HOCH2(CH atoms, hence, parent hydrocarbon is 
2)3CH2COCH3 will 

be named as 7-hydroxyheptan-2-one and not hexane. Thus, the systematic name is 
as 2-oxoheptan -7-ol. Similarly, BrCH2CH=CH2 Hexane-2,4-dione.
is named as 3-bromoprop-1-ene and not 
1-bromoprop-2-ene. 
 If more than one functional group of the 
same type are present, their number is 
indicated by adding di, tri, etc. before the 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   266 10/10/2022   10:37:32 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 267

table 8.4  some Functional groups and classes of Organic compounds

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   267 10/10/2022   10:37:32 AM



268 chemistry

solution (iii) Six membered ring containing a 
Here, two functional groups namely carbon-carbon double bond is implied 
ketone and carboxylic acid are present. by cyclohexene, which is numbered as 
The principal functional group is the shown in (I). The prefix 3-nitro means 
carboxylic acid group; hence the parent that a nitro group is present on C-3. 
chain will be suffixed with ‘oic’ acid. Thus, complete structural formula of the 
Numbering of the chain starts from compound is (II). Double bond is suffixed 
carbon of – COOH functional group. functional group whereas NO2 is prefixed 
The keto group in the chain at carbon functional group therefore double bond 
5 is indicated by ‘oxo’. The longest gets preference over –NO2 group:
chain including the principal functional  
group has 6 carbon atoms; hence the 
parent hydrocarbon is hexane. The 
compound is, therefore, named as  
5-Oxohexanoic acid.

(iv) ‘1-ol’ means that a -OH group is 
solution present at C-1. OH is suffixed functional 
The two C=C functional groups are group and gets preference over C=C 
present at carbon atoms 1 and 3, while bond. Thus the structure is as shown  
the C≡C functional group is present at in (II):
carbon 5. These groups are indicated by 
suffixes ‘diene’ and ‘yne’ respectively. The 
longest chain containing the functional 
groups has 6 carbon atoms; hence the 
parent hydrocarbon is hexane. The name 
of compound, therefore, is Hexa-1,3-
dien-5-yne.
Problem 8.9 (v) ‘heptanal’ indicates the compound 

to be an aldehyde containing 7 carbon 
Derive the structure of (i) 2-Chlorohexane, atoms in the parent chain. The  
(ii) Pent-4-en-2-ol, (iii) 3- Nitrocyclohexene, ‘6-hydroxy’ indicates that -OH group is 
(iv) Cyclohex-2-en-1-ol, (v) 6-Hydroxy- present at carbon 6. Thus, the structural 
heptanal. formula of the compound is: CH3CH(OH)
solution CH2CH2CH2CH2CHO. Carbon atom of –
(i) ‘hexane’ indicates the presence of  CHO group is included while numbering 
6 carbon atoms in the chain. The the carbon chain.
functional group chloro is present at 
carbon 2. Hence, the structure of the 8.5.4 nomenclature of substituted 
compound is CH3CH2CH2CH2CH(Cl)CH3. Benzene compounds
( i i )  ‘pent ’  indicates that parent 
hydrocarbon contains 5 carbon atoms For IUPAC nomenclature of substituted 
in the chain. ‘en’ and ‘ol’ correspond to benzene compounds, the substituent is 
the functional groups C=C and -OH at placed as prefix to the word benzene as shown 
carbon atoms 4 and 2 respectively. Thus, in the following examples. However, common 
the structure is names (written in bracket below) of many 

substituted benzene compounds are also 
CH2=CHCH2CH (OH)CH3. universally used. 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   268 10/10/2022   10:37:32 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 269

 Substituent of the base compound is 
assigned number1 and then the direction 
of numbering is chosen such that the 
next substituent gets the lowest number. 
The substituents appear in the name in 

Methylbenzene      Methoxybenzene     Aminobenzene alphabetical order. Some examples are given 
    (Toluene)              (Anisole)                 (Aniline) below.

      Nitrobenzene                  Bromobenzene 1-Chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene 
(not 4-chloro,1,3-dinitrobenzene)                

I f  benzene r ing is  disubst i tuted, 
the position of substituents is defined 
by numbering the carbon atoms of the 
ring such that the substituents are 
located at the lowest numbers possible.
For example, the compound(b) is named 
as 1,3-dibromobenzene and not  as 
1,5-dibromobenzene.

2-Chloro-1-methyl-4-nitrobenzene 
(not 4-methyl-5-chloro-nitrobenzene)    

(a) (b) (c)
1,2-Dibromo- 1,3-Dibromo- 1,4-Dibromo- 

benzene benzene benzene
 In the trivial system of nomenclature 
the terms ortho (o), meta (m) and para (p) 2-Chloro-4-methylanisole 4-Ethyl-2-methylaniline 

are used as prefixes to indicate the relative 
positions 1,2;1,3 and 1,4 respectively. Thus, 
1,3-dibromobenzene (b) is named as 
m-dibromobenzene (meta is abbreviated as 
m-) and the other isomers of dibromobenzene 
1,2-(a) and 1,4-(c), are named as ortho (or 
just o-) and para (or just p-)-dibromobenzene, 
respectively. 
 For tri - or higher substituted benzene 3,4-Dimethylphenol
derivatives, these prefixes cannot be used 
and the compounds are named by identifying  When a benzene ring is attached to an 
substituent positions on the ring by following alkane with a functional group, it is considered 
the lowest locant rule. In some cases, common as substituent, instead of a parent. The name 
name of benzene derivatives is taken as  the for benzene as substituent is phenyl (C6H5-, 
base compound. also abbreviated as Ph).

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   269 10/10/2022   10:37:33 AM



270 chemistry

Problem 8.10 different carbon skeletons, these are referred 
to as chain isomers and the phenomenon is 

Write the structural formula of: termed as chain isomerism. For example, 
(a)  o-Ethylanisole, (b) p-Nitroaniline, C  

5H12 represents three compounds:
(c)  2,3 - Dibromo -1 - phenylpentane,
(d)  4-Ethyl-1-fluoro-2-nitrobenzene.   CH3

solution   
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3 CH3−CHCH2CH3    
 Pentane Isopentane
   (2-Methylbutane) 

                         CH3

                 
CH3 C CH3

(a)  (b)                       
                 CH3

 Neopentane
(2,2-Dimethylpropane)

(ii) Position isomerism: When two or 
more compounds differ in the position of 

(c) (d) substituent atom or functional group on 
the carbon skeleton, they are called position 

8.6 isOmerism isomers and this phenomenon is termed 
as position isomerism. For example, the 

The phenomenon of existence of two or more molecular formula C3H8O represents two 
compounds possessing the same molecular alcohols:
formula but different properties is known 
as isomerism. Such compounds are called  OH
as isomers. The following flow chart shows  
different types of isomerism.  CH3CH2CH2OH CH3−CH-CH3

 Propan-1-ol  Propan-2-ol
8.6.1 structural isomerism
Compounds having the same molecular (iii) Functional group isomerism: Two or 
formula but different structures (manners more compounds having the same molecular 
in which atoms are linked) are classified as formula but different functional groups 
structural isomers. Some typical examples are called functional isomers and this 
of different types of structural isomerism are phenomenon is termed as functional group 
given below: isomerism. For example, the molecular 
(i) Chain isomerism: When two or more formula C3H6O represents an aldehyde and 
compounds have similar molecular formula but a ketone:

Isomerism

Structural isomerism Stereoisomerism

Chain Position Functional Metamerism Geometrical Optical
isomerism isomerism group isomerism isomerism

isomerism

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   270 10/10/2022   10:37:33 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 271

in understanding the reactivity of organic 
  O    H compounds and in planning strategy for their 
  	 	 	  synthesis. 
 CH3−C-CH3 CH3−CH2—C= O

In the following sections, we shall learn 
 Propanone		 Propanal some of the principles that explain how these 

(iv) Metamerism: It arises due to different reactions take place. 
alkyl chains on either side of the functional 
group in the molecule. For example, C4H10O 8.7.1 Fission of a Covalent Bond

represents methoxypropane (CH3OC3H7) and A covalent bond can get cleaved either by : (i) 
ethoxyethane (C2H5OC2H5). heterolytic cleavage, or by (ii) homolytic 

8.6.2 Stereoisomerism cleavage. 
 In heterolytic cleavage, the bond breaks 

The compounds that have the same in such a fashion that the shared pair of 
constitution and sequence of covalent bonds electrons remains with  one of the fragments. 
but differ in relative positions of their atoms After heterolysis, one atom has a sextet 
or groups in space are called stereoisomers. electronic structure and a positive charge and 
This special type of isomerism is called as the other, a valence octet with at least one lone 
stereoisomerism and can be classified as pair and a negative charge. Thus, heterolytic 
geometrical and optical isomerism. +

cleavage of bromomethane will give CH3 and 
8.7 FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN Br– as shown below.

ORGANIC REACTION MECHANISM
In an organic reaction, the organic molecule 
(also referred as a substrate) reacts with an  A species having a carbon atom possessing 
appropriate attacking reagent and leads to sextext of electrons and a positive charge is 
the formation of one or more intermediate(s) called a carbocation (earlier called carbonium 
and finally product(s) ion). The H3 ion is known as a methyl cation 
The general reaction is depicted as follows : or methyl carbonium ion. Carbocations are 

classified as primary, secondary or tertiary 
Attacking depending on  whether one, two or three 
Reagent

Organic [Intermediate] Product(s) carbons are directly attached to the positively 
molecule charged carbon. Some other examples of 

+
(Substrate) Byproducts carbocations are: CH3CH  

2 (ethyl cation, a 
+

primary carbocation), (CH3)2CH (isopropyl 
+

Substrate is that reactant which supplies cation, a secondary carbocation), and (CH3)3C 
carbon to the new bond and the other reactant (tert-butyl cation, a tertiary carbocation). 
is called reagent. If both the reactants Carbocations are highly unstable and 
supply carbon to the new bond then choice reactive species. Alkyl groups directly 
is arbitrary and in that case the molecule on attached to the positively charged carbon 
which attention is focused is called substrate. stabilise the carbocations due to inductive 

In such a reaction a covalent bond and hyperconjugation effects, which you will 
between two carbon atoms or a carbon and be studying in the sections 8.7.5 and 8.7.9. 
some other atom is broken and a new bond is The observed order of carbocation stability 

+ + + +
formed. A sequential account of each step, is: CH3 < CH3CH2 < (CH3)2CH < (CH3)3C. These 
describing details of electron movement, carbocations have trigonal planar shape 
energetics during bond cleavage and bond with positively charged carbon being sp2 

+
formation, and the rates of transformation hybridised. Thus, the shape of CH3 may be 
of reactants into products (kinetics) is considered as being derived from the overlap 
referred to as reaction mechanism. The of three equivalent C(sp2) hybridised orbitals 
knowledge of reaction mechanism helps with 1s orbital of each of the three hydrogen 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   271 12/13/2022   10:12:45



272 chemistry

atoms. Each bond may be represented as curved arrow. Such cleavage results in 
C(sp2)–H(1s) sigma bond. The remaining the formation of neutral species (atom or 
carbon orbital is perpendicular to the group) which contains an unpaired electron. 
molecular plane and contains no electrons. These species are called free radicals. Like 
[Fig. 8.3(a)]. carbocations and carbanions, free radicals are 

also very reactive. A homolytic cleavage can be 
shown as:

       Alkyl 
       free radical
Alkyl radicals are classified as primary, 
secondary, or tertiary. Alkyl radical stability 
increases as we proceed from primary to 

Fig. 8.3 (a)  Shape of methyl carbocation tertiary:
The heterolytic cleavage can also give a   , 
species in which carbon gets the shared  Methyl Ethyl Isopropyl Tert-butyl
pair of electrons. For example, when group  free  free  free free
Z attached to  the carbon leaves without  radical radical radical radical

Organic reactions, which proceed by 
homolytic fission are called free radical or 

electron pair, the methyl anion  is homopolar or nonpolar reactions. 

formed. Such a carbon species carrying a 8.7.2 substrate and reagent 
negative charge on carbon atom is called Ions are generally not formed in the reactions 
carbanion.  Carbon in carbanion is generally of organic compounds. Molecules as such 
sp3 hybridised and its structure is distorted participate in the reaction. It is convenient to 
tetrahedron as shown in Fig. 8.3(b). name one reagent as substrate and other as 

reagent. In general, a molecule whose carbon 
is involved in new bond formation is called 
substrate and the other one is called reagent. 
When carbon-carbon bond is formed, the 
choice of naming the reactants as substrate 
and reagent is arbitrary and depends on 
molecule under observation. Example:

Fig. 8.3 (b)  Shape of methyl carbanion
(i)  CH2 = CH2  +  Br2  → CH2 Br – CH2Br
 Substrate   Reagent Product

Carbanions are also unstable and reactive 
species. The organic reactions which proceed 
through heterolytic bond cleavage are called (ii)  
ionic or heteropolar or just polar reactions.
 In homolytic cleavage, one of the electrons 
of the shared pair in a covalent bond goes 
with each of the bonded atoms. Thus, in 
homolytic cleavage, the movement of a 
single electron takes place instead of an Nucleophiles and Electrophiles
electron pair. The single electron movement Reagents attack the reactive site of the 
is shown by ‘half-headed’ (fish hook: ) substrate. The reactive site may be electron 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   272 10/10/2022   10:37:34 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 273

deficient portion of the molecule (a positive 
reactive site) e.g., an atom with incomplete Problem 8.11
electron shell or the positive end of the dipole Using curved-arrow notation, show the 
in the molecule. If the attacking species is formation of reactive  intermediates when 
electron rich, it attacks these sites. If attacking the following covalent bonds undergo 
species is electron deficient, the reactive site heterolytic cleavage. 
for it is that part of the substrate molecule (a) CH3–SCH3, (b) CH3–CN, (c) CH3–Cu
which can supply electrons, e.g., π electrons Solution 
in a double bond.

A reagent that brings an electron pair to 
the reactive site is called a nucleophile (Nu:) 
i.e., nucleus seeking and the reaction is then 
called nucleophilic. A reagent that takes away 
an electron pair from reactive site is called 
electrophile (E+) i.e., electron seeking and the 
reaction is called electrophilic. Problem 8.12

During a polar organic reaction, a Giving justification, categorise the 
nucleophile attacks an electrophilic centre following molecules/ions as nucleophile 
of the substrate which is that specific atom or electrophile:
or part of the substrate which is electron 
deficient. Similarly, the electrophiles attack 
at  nucleophilic centre, which is the electron 
rich centre of the substrate. Thus, the 
electrophiles receive electron pair from the Solution
substrate when the two undergo bonding Nucleophiles: HS–,C2H5O

–,(CH3)3N:H2N:– 

interaction. A curved-arrow notation is used These species have unshared pair of 
to show the movement of an electron pair electrons, which can be donated and 
from the nucleophile to the electrophile. Some shared with an electrophile.
examples of nucleophiles are the negatively + + + 

Electrophiles: BF3,C1 H3–C =O,N O2. charged ions with lone pair of electrons  such Reactive sites have only six valence 
as hydroxide (HO– ), cyanide (NC–) ions and electrons; can accept electron pair from 
carbanions (R3C:–). Neutral molecules such a nucleophile.
as  etc., can also act as 
nucleophiles due to the presence of lone Problem 8.13 
pair of electrons. Examples of electrophiles Identify electrophilic centre in the 

+
include carbocations (CH following: CH3CH=O, CH3CN, CH3I.

3) and neutral 
molecules having functional groups like Solution
carbonyl group (>C=O) or alkyl halides Among CH
(R 3HC*=O, H3CC*≡N, and  

3C-X, where X is a halogen atom). The H
carbon atom in carbocations has sextet 3C

*–I, the starred carbon atoms are 

configuration; hence, it is electron deficient electrophilic centers as they will have 

and can receive a pair of electrons from the partial positive charge due to polarity of 
nucleophiles. In neutral molecules such as the bond. 
alkyl halides, due to the polarity of the C-X 
bond a partial positive charge is generated 8.7.3 Electron Movement in Organic 
on the carbon atom and hence the carbon Reactions
atom becomes an electrophilic centre at which The movement of electrons in organic 
a nucleophile can attack. reactions can be shown by curved-arrow 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   273 11/10/2022   15:21:53



274 chemistry

notation. It shows how changes in bonding 8.7.5 inductive effect
occur due to electronic redistribution during When a covalent bond is formed between 
the reaction. To show the change in position atoms of different electronegativity, the 
of a pair of electrons, curved arrow starts electron density is more towards the more 
from the point from where an electron pair is electronegative atom of the bond. Such a shift 
shifted and it ends at a location to which the of electron density results in a polar covalent 
pair of electron may move. bond. Bond polarity leads to various electronic 

Presentation of shifting of electron pair is effects in organic compounds. 
given below : Let us consider cholorethane (CH3CH2Cl) 
(i)   from π bond to   in which the C–Cl bond is a polar covalent 
   adjacent bond position bond. It is polarised in such a way that the 

carbon-1 gains some positive charge (δ+) 
(ii)  from π bond to   and the chlorine some negative charge (δ–). 
   adjacent atom The fractional electronic charges on the two 
(iii)  from atom to adjacent  atoms in a polar covalent bond are denoted 
    bond  position by symbol δ (delta) and the shift of electron 

Movement of single electron is indicated by density is shown by an arrow that points from 
δ+ 

a single barbed ‘fish hooks’ (i.e. half headed to δ– end of the polar bond.
curved arrow). For example, in transfer of δδ+ δ+ δ−

hydroxide ion giving ethanol and in the CH3→CH2→Cl
dissociation of chloromethane, the movement 2 1
of electron using curved arrows can be  In turn carbon-1, which has developed 
depicted as follows: partial positive charge (δ+) draws some 

electron density towards it from the adjacent 
C-C bond. Consequently, some positive charge 
(δδ+) develops on carbon-2 also, where δδ+ 

symbolises relatively smaller positive charge 
as compared to that on carbon – 1. In other 
words, the polar C – Cl bond induces polarity 

8.7.4 electron displacement effects in in the adjacent bonds. Such polarisation of 
covalent Bonds σ-bond caused by the polarisation of adjacent 

σ-bond is referred to as the inductive effect. 
The electron displacement in an organic This effect is passed on to the subsequent 
molecule may take place either in the ground bonds also but the effect decreases rapidly 
state under the influence of an atom or a as the number of intervening bonds increases 
substituent group or in the presence of an and becomes vanishingly small after three 
appropriate attacking reagent. The electron bonds. The inductive effect is related to the 
displacements due to the influence of ability of substituent(s) to either withdraw or 
an atom or a substituent group present in donate electron density to the attached carbon 
the molecule cause permanent polarlisation atom. Based on this ability, the substitutents 
of the bond. Inductive effect and resonance can be classified as electron-withdrawing or 
effects are examples of this type of electron electron donating groups relative to hydrogen. 
d isp lacements .  Temporary  e lectron Halogens and many other groups such as 
displacement effects are seen in a molecule nitro (- NO2), cyano  (- CN), carboxy (- COOH), 
when a reagent approaches to attack it. ester (COOR), aryloxy (-OAr, e.g. – OC6H5), etc. 
This type of electron displacement is called are electron-withdrawing groups. On the other 
electromeric effect or polarisability effect. hand, the alkyl groups like methyl (–CH3) and 
In the following sections we will learn about ethyl (–CH2–CH3) are usually considered as 
these types of electronic displacements. electron donating groups.

 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   274 10/10/2022   10:37:34 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 275

benzene cannot be adequately represented 
Problem 8.14 by any of these structures, rather it is 
Which bond is more polar in the following a hybrid of the two structures (I and II) 
pairs of molecules: (a) H3C-H, H called resonance structures. The resonance 

3C-Br 
(b) H3C-NH structures (canonical structures or 

2, H3C-OH (c) H3C-OH,  
H contributing structures) are hypothetical 

3C-SH 
and individually do not represent any 

solution real molecule. They contribute to the actual 
(a) C–Br, since Br is more electronegative structure in proportion to their stability.
than H, (b) C–O, (c) C–O  Another example of resonance is provided 
Problem 8.15 by nitromethane (CH3NO2) which can be 
In which C–C bond of CH3CH2CH2Br, the represented by two Lewis structures, (I and 
inductive effect is expected to be the least? II). There are two types of N-O bonds in these 

structures.
solution
Magnitude of inductive effect diminishes 
as the number of intervening bonds 
increases. Hence, the effect is least in the     
bond between carbon-3 and hydrogen.

however, it is known that the two n–O 
8.7.6  resonance structure bonds of nitromethane are of the same 

length (intermediate between a n–O single 
There are many organic molecules whose bond and a n=O double bond). the actual 
behaviour cannot be explained by a single Lewis structure of nitromethane is therefore 
structure. An example is that of a resonance hybrid of the two canonical 
benzene. Its cyclic structure forms I and II. 
containing alternating  C–C single  The energy of actual structure of the molecule 
and C=C  double bonds shown (the resonance hybrid) is lower than that of 
is inadequate for explaining its Benzene any of the canonical structures. The difference 
characteristic properties. in energy between the actual structure and the 
 As per the above representation, benzene lowest energy resonance structure is called the 
should exhibit two different bond lengths, resonance stabilisation energy or simply 
due to C–C single and C=C double bonds. the resonance energy. The more the number 
However, as determined experimentally of important contributing structures, the 
benzene has a uniform C–C bond distances more is the resonance energy. Resonance is 
of 139 pm, a value intermediate between the particularly important when the contributing 

structures are equivalent in energy.
C–C single(154 pm) and C=C double (134 
pm) bonds. Thus, the structure of benzene  The following rules are applied while writing 
cannot be represented adequately by the resonance structures: 
above structure. Further, benzene can be  The resonance structures have (i) the same 

positions of nuclei and (ii) the same number of 
represented equally well by the energetically unpaired electrons. Among the resonance 
identical structures I and II. structures, the one which has more number 

of covalent bonds, all the atoms with octet 
of electrons (except hydrogen which has a 
duplet), less separation of opposite charges, (a 
negative charge if any on more electronegative 
atom, a positive charge if any on more 

 Therefore, according to the resonance electropositive atom) and more dispersal of 
theory (Unit 4) the actual structure of charge, is more stable than others.  

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   275 10/10/2022   10:37:34 AM



276 chemistry

Problem 8.16 solution
Write resonance structures of CH3COO– The two structures are less important 
and show the movement of electrons by contributors as they involve charge 
curved arrows. separation. Additionally, structure 
solution I contains a carbon atom with an 

incomplete octet.
First, write the structure and put 
unshared pairs of valence electrons on 8.7.7 resonance effect
appropriate atoms. Then draw the arrows 
one at a time moving the electrons to get The resonance effect is defined as ‘the polarity 
the other structures. produced in the molecule by the interaction 

of two π-bonds or between a π-bond and 
lone pair of electrons present on an adjacent 
atom’. The effect is transmitted through the 
chain. There are two types of resonance or 
mesomeric effect designated as R or M effect.

Problem 8.17 (i) Positive Resonance Effect (+R effect) 
Wri te  resonance  s t ruc tures  o f  In this effect, the transfer of electrons is away 
CH2=CH–CHO. Indicate relative stability from an atom or substituent group attached 
of the contributing structures. to the conjugated system. This electron 

solution displacement makes certain positions in the 
molecule of high electron densities. This effect 
in aniline is shown as : 

Stability: I > II > III (ii) Negative Resonance Effect (- R effect)
[I: Most stable,  more number of covalent This effect is observed when the transfer of 
bonds, each carbon and oxygen atom has electrons is towards the atom or substituent 
an octet and no separation of opposite group attached to the conjugated system. 
charge II: negative charge on more For example in nitrobenzene this electron 
electronegative atom and positive charge displacement can be depicted as : 
on more electropositive atom; III: does 
not contribute as oxygen has positive 
charge and carbon has negative charge, 
hence least stable].  

Problem 8.18
Explain why the following two structures, 
I and II cannot be the major contributors The atoms or substituent groups, which 
to the real structure of CH3COOCH3. represent +R or  –R electron displacement 

effects are as follows : 
+R effect: – halogen, –OH, –OR, –OCOR, –NH2, 
–NHR, –NR2, –NHCOR, 
– R effect: – COOH, –CHO, >C=O, – CN, –NO2 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   276 10/10/2022   10:37:35 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 277

The presence of alternate single and system or to an atom with an unshared 
double bonds in an open chain or cyclic system p orbital. The σ electrons of C—H bond of the 
is termed as a conjugated system. These alkyl group enter into partial conjugation with 
systems often show abnormal behaviour. the attached unsaturated system or with the 
The examples are 1,3- butadiene, aniline unshared p orbital. Hyperconjugation is a 
and nitrobenzene etc. In such systems, the permanent effect.
π-electrons are delocalised and the system To understand hyperconjugation effect, let 
develops polarity. +

us take an example of CH3 CH2 (ethyl cation) in 
8.7.8 electromeric effect (e effect) which the positively charged carbon atom has 
It is a temporary effect. The organic compounds an empty p orbital. One of the C-H bonds of 
having a multiple bond (a double or triple the methyl group can align in the plane of this 
bond) show this effect in the presence of empty p orbital and the electrons constituting 
an attacking reagent only. It is defined as the C-H bond in plane with this p orbital can 
the complete transfer of a shared pair of then be delocalised into the empty p orbital 
π-electrons to one of the atoms joined by a as depicted in Fig. 8.4 (a).
multiple bond on the demand of an attacking 
reagent. The effect is annulled as soon as the 
attacking reagent is removed from the domain 
of the reaction. It is represented by E and the 
shifting of the electrons is shown by a curved 
arrow ( ). There are two distinct types of 
electromeric effect. 
(i) Positive Eelctromeric Effect (+E effect) In 
this effect the π−electrons of the multiple 
bond are transferred to that atom to which 
the reagent gets attached. For example: 

Fig. 8.4(a) Orbi tal  diagram showing 
hyperconjugation in ethyl cation

This type of overlap stabilises the 
carbocation because electron density from 

(ii) Negative Electromeric Effect (–E effect) In the adjacent σ bond helps in dispersing the 
this effect the π - electrons of the multiple positive charge. 
bond are transferred to that atom to which 
the attacking reagent does not get attached. 
For example:

When inductive and electromeric effects 
operate in opposite directions, the electomeric 
effect predominates.

In general, greater the number of alkyl 
8.7.9 hyperconjugation groups attached to a positively charged carbon 
Hyperconjugation is a general stabilising atom, the greater is the hyperconjugation 
interaction. It involves delocalisation of interaction and stabilisation of the cation. 
σ electrons of C—H bond of an alkyl group Thus, we have the following relative stability 
directly attached to an atom of unsaturated of carbocations :  

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   277 10/10/2022   10:37:35 AM



278 chemistry

Problem 8.19 +
Explain why (CH3)3C

 is more stable 
+ +

than CH3CH2 and CH3 is the least stable  
cation. 

Hyperconjugation is also possible in solution 
alkenes and alkylarenes. +

Hyperconjugation interaction in (CH3)3C
  is 

D e l o c a l i s a t i o n  o f  e l e c t r o n s  b y + +
greater than in CH3CH2 as the (CH  

3)hyperconjugation in the case of alkene can 3C   
+

has nine C-H bonds. In CH3, vacant p 
be depicted as in Fig. 8.4(b).

orbital is perpendicular to the plane  
in which C-H bonds lie; hence cannot 

+
overlap with it. Thus, C H3 lacks 
hyperconjugative stability. 

8.7.10 types of Organic reactions and 
Mechanisms

Organic reactions can be classified into the 
Fig. 8.4(b) Orbital diagram showing following categories:

hyperconjugation in propene (i) Substitution reactions
(ii) Addition reactions

There are various ways of looking at the (iii) Elimination reactions
hyperconjugative effect. One of the way is to (iv) Rearrangement reactions
regard C—H bond as possessing partial ionic 
character due to resonance. You will be studying these reactions in 

Unit 9 and later in class XII.

8.8 methOds OF PuriFicatiOn OF 
Organic cOmPOunds

Once an organic compound is extracted 
from a natural source or synthesised in the 
laboratory, it is essential to purify it. Various 
methods used for the purification of organic 
compounds are based on the nature of the 
compound and the impurity present in it. 

The common techniques used for 
purification are as follows :
(i) Sublimation
(ii) Crystallisation
(iii) Distillation
(iv) Differential extraction and
(v) Chromatography 

Finally, the purity of a compound is 
ascertained by determining its melting or 
boiling point. Most of the pure compounds 
have sharp melting points and boiling points. 

The hyperconjugation may also be New methods of checking the purity of an 
regarded as no bond resonance. organic compound are based on different 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   278 10/10/2022   10:37:35 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 279

types of chromatographic and spectroscopic carefully. On boiling, the vapours of lower 
techniques. boiling component are formed first. The 

8.8.1 sublimation vapours are condensed by using a condenser 
and the liquid is collected in a receiver. 

You have learnt earlier that on heating, some The vapours of higher boiling component 
solid substances change from solid to vapour form later and the liquid can be collected 
state without passing through liquid state. separately.
The purification technique based on the above 
principle is known as sublimation and is used 
to separate sublimable compounds from non-
sublimable impurities.

8.8.2 crystallisation
This is one of the most commonly used 
techniques for the purification of solid organic 
compounds. It is based on the difference in 
the solubilities of the compound and the 
impurities in a suitable solvent. The impure 
compound is dissolved in a solvent in which it 
is sparingly soluble at room temperature but 
appreciably soluble at higher temperature. 
The solution is concentrated to get a nearly 
saturated solution. On cooling the solution, 
pure compound crystallises out and is 
removed by filtration. The filtrate (mother 
liquor) contains impurities and small quantity 
of the compound. If the compound is highly 
soluble in one solvent and very little  soluble 
in another solvent, crystallisation can be Fig.8.5 Simple distillation. The vapours of a 

satisfactorily carried out in a mixture of these substance formed are condensed and 

solvents. Impurities, which impart colour to the liquid is collected in conical flask.

the solution are removed by adsorbing over 
activated charcoal. Repeated crystallisation Fractional Distillation: If the difference 
becomes necessary for the purification in boiling points of two liquids is not much, 
of compounds containing impurities of simple distillation cannot be used to separate 
comparable solubilities. them.  The vapours of such liquids are formed 

within the same temperature range and are 
8.8.3 distillation condensed simultaneously.  The technique of 
This important method is used to separate fractional distillation is used in such cases. In 
(i) volatile liquids from nonvolatile impurities this technique, vapours of a liquid mixture are 
and (ii) the liquids having sufficient difference passed through a fractionating column before 
in their boiling points. Liquids having condensation. The fractionating column is 
different boiling points vaporise at different fitted over the mouth of the round bottom 
temperatures. The vapours are cooled and flask (Fig.8.6, page 280).
the liquids so formed are collected separately. Vapours of the liquid with higher boiling 
Chloroform (b.p 334 K) and aniline (b.p. 457 point condense before the vapours of the 
K) are easily separated by the technique of liquid with lower boiling point. The vapours 
distillation (Fig 8.5). The liquid mixture is rising up in the fractionating column become 
taken in a round bottom flask and heated richer in more volatile component. By the 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   279 10/10/2022   10:37:35 AM



280 chemistry

unit in the fractionating column is called a 
theoretical plate.  Commercially, columns 
with hundreds of plates are available.

One of the technological applications of 
fractional distillation is to separate different 
fractions of crude oil in petroleum industry.

Distillation under reduced 
pressure: This method is 
used to purify liquids having 
very high boiling points and 
those, which decompose at 
or below their boiling points. 
Such liquids are made to boil 
at a temperature lower than 
their normal boiling points 
by reducing the pressure on 
their surface. A liquid boils 
at a temperature at which its 
vapour pressure is equal to 
the external pressure. The 
pressure is reduced with 
the help of a water pump 
or vacuum pump (Fig.8.8). 
Glycerol can be separated from 

Fig.8.6  Fractional distillation. The vapours of lower boiling spent-lye in soap industry by 
fraction reach the top of the column first followed by using this technique.  
vapours of higher boiling fractions.

time the vapours reach to the top of the 
fractionating column, these are rich in the 
more volatile component. Fractionating 
columns are available in various sizes and 
designs as shown in Fig.8.7. A fractionating 
column provides many surfaces for heat 
exchange between the ascending vapours 
and the descending condensed liquid.  Some 
of the condensing liquid in the fractionating 
column obtains heat from the ascending 
vapours and revaporises.  The vapours thus 
become richer in low boiling component.  The 
vapours of low boiling component ascend 
to the top of the column. On reaching the 
top, the vapours become pure in low boiling 
component and pass through the condenser 
and the pure liquid is collected in a receiver. 
After a series of successive distillations, the 
remaining liquid in the distillation flask gets 
enriched in high boiling component. Each 
successive condensation and vaporisation Fig.8.7 Different types of fractionating columns.

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   280 10/10/2022   10:37:35 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 281

Fig.8.8 Distillation under reduced pressure. A liquid boils at a temperature below its 
vapour pressure by reducing the pressure.

Steam Distillation: This technique is 8.8.4 differential extraction 
applied to separate substances which are When an organic compound is present in an 
steam volatile and are immiscible with water. aqueous medium, it is separated by shaking 
In steam distillation, steam from a steam it with an organic solvent in which it is more 
generator is passed through a heated flask soluble than in water. The organic solvent and 
containing the liquid to be distilled. The the aqueous solution should be immiscible 
mixture of steam and the volatile organic with each other so that they form two distinct 
compound is condensed and collected. The layers which can be separated by separatory 
compound is later separated from water using funnel. The organic solvent is later removed 
a separating funnel. In steam distillation, by distillation or by evaporation to get back 
the liquid boils when the sum of vapour the compound. Differential extraction is 
pressures due to the organic liquid (p1) carried out in a separatory funnel as shown in 
and that due to water (p2) becomes equal to Fig. 8.10 (Page 282). If the organic compound 
the atmospheric pressure (p), i.e. p =p1+ p2. is less soluble in the organic solvent, a very 
Since p1 is lower than p, the organic liquid large quantity of solvent would be required 
vaporises at lower temperature than its to extract even a very small quantity of the 
boiling point. compound. The technique of continuous 

Thus, if one of the substances in the extraction is employed in such cases. In this 
mixture is water and the other, a water technique same solvent is repeatedly used for 
insoluble substance, then the mixture will boil extraction of the compound.  
close to but below, 373K. A mixture of water 8.8.5  chromatography
and the substance is obtained which can Chromatography is an important technique 
be separated by using a separating funnel. extensively used to separate mixtures into 
Aniline is separated by this technique from their components, purify compounds and 
aniline – water mixture  (Fig.8.9, Page 282). also to test the purity of compounds. The 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   281 10/10/2022   10:37:36 AM



282 chemistry

Fig.8.9  Steam distillation.  Steam volatile component volatilizes, the vapours condense 
in the condenser and the liquid collects in conical flask.

name chromatography is based on the Greek 
word chroma, for colour since the method 
was first used for the separation of coloured 
substances found in plants. In this technique, 
the mixture of substances is applied onto a 
stationary phase, which may be a solid or a 
liquid. A pure solvent, a mixture of solvents, 
or a gas is allowed to move slowly over the 
stationary phase. The components of the 
mixture get gradually separated from one 
another. The moving phase is called the 
mobile phase.

Based on the principle involved, 
chromatography is classified into different 
categories. Two of these are:
(a) Adsorption chromatography, and Fig.8.10 Differential extraction. Extraction of com-
(b) Partition chromatography.  pound takes place based on difference 

in solubility 
a) Adsorption Chromatography: Adsor-
ption chromatography is based on the fact 
that different compounds are adsorbed on distances over the stationary phase. Following 
an adsorbent to different degrees. Commonly are two main types of chromatographic 
used adsorbents are silica gel and alumina. techniques based on the principle of differential 
When a mobile phase is allowed to move adsorption.  
over a stationary phase (adsorbent), the (a)  Column chromatography, and 
components of the mixture move by varying (b) Thin layer chromatography.

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   282 10/10/2022   10:37:36 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 283

Column Chromatography:  Column The glass plate is then placed in a closed jar 
chromatography involves separation of containing the eluant (Fig. 8.12a). As the 
a mixture over a  column of adsorbent eluant rises up the plate, the components of 
(stationary phase) packed in a glass tube. the mixture move up along with the eluant to 
The column is fitted with a stopcock at its different distances depending on their degree 
lower end (Fig. 8.11).  The mixture adsorbed of adsorption and separation takes place. 
on adsorbent is placed on the top of the The relative adsorption of each component 
adsorbent column packed in a glass tube. of the mixture is expressed in terms of its 
An appropriate eluant which is a liquid or a retardation factor i.e. Rf value (Fig.8.12 b).
mixture of liquids is allowed to flow down the R

f  = Distance moved by the substance from base line (x)      
column slowly.  Depending upon the degree to  Distance moved by the solvent from base line (y)
which the compounds are adsorbed, complete 
separation takes place.  The most readily 
adsorbed substances are retained near the top 
and others come down to various distances 
in the column (Fig.8.11).

Fig.8.12 (a) Thin layer chromatography. 
Chromatogram being developed. 

Fig.8.11   Column chromatography. Different 
stages of separation of components Fig.8.12 (b)    Developed chromatogram.
of a mixture.

The spots of coloured compounds are 
Thin Layer Chromatography: Thin layer visible on TLC plate due to their original colour. 
chromatography (TLC) is another type of The spots of colourless compounds, which are 
adsorption chromatography, which involves invisible to the eye but fluoresce in ultraviolet 
separation of substances of a mixture over light, can be detected by putting the plate under 
a thin layer of an adsorbent coated on glass ultraviolet light. Another detection technique 
plate.  A thin layer (about 0.2mm thick) of is to place the plate in a covered jar containing 
an adsorbent (silica gel or alumina) is spread a few crystals of iodine. Spots of compounds, 
over a glass plate of suitable size. The plate which adsorb iodine, will show up as brown 
is known as thin layer chromatography plate spots.  Sometimes an appropriate reagent 
or chromaplate. The solution of the mixture may also be sprayed on the plate. For example, 
to be separated is applied as a small spot amino acids may be detected by spraying the 
about 2 cm above one end of the TLC plate. plate with ninhydrin solution (Fig.8.12b). 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   283 11/10/2022   15:22:47



284 chemistry

Partition Chromatography: Partition spot on the chromatogram. The spots of the 
chromatography is based on continuous separated colourless compounds may be 
differential partitioning of components of observed either under ultraviolet light or by 
a mixture between stationary and mobile the use of an appropriate spray reagent as 
phases. Paper chromatography is a type discussed under thin layer chromatography. 
of partition chromatography. In paper 8.9 qualitatiVe analysis OF Organic 
chromatography, a special quality paper cOmPOunds
known as chromatography paper is used. 
Chromatography paper contains water trapped The elements present in organic compounds 
in it, which acts as the stationary phase. are carbon and hydrogen. In addition to 

A strip of chromatography paper spotted these, they may also contain oxygen, nitrogen, 
at the base with the solution of the mixture is sulphur, halogens and phosphorus.
suspended in a suitable solvent or a mixture 8.9.1  detection of carbon and hydrogen
of solvents (Fig. 8.13). This solvent acts as the Carbon and hydrogen are detected by heating 
mobile phase. The solvent rises up the paper the compound with copper(II) oxide. Carbon 
by capillary action and flows over the spot. The present in the compound is oxidised to 
paper selectively retains different components carbon dioxide (tested with lime-water, which 
according to their differing partition in the develops turbidity) and hydrogen to water 
two phases.   The paper strip so developed is (tested with anhydrous copper sulphate, 
known as a chromatogram.  The spots of the which turns blue).
separated coloured compounds are visible at C + 2CuO  2Cu + CO
different heights from the position of initial 2

2H + CuO  Cu + H2O
CO2 + Ca(OH)2  CaCO3↓ + H2O
5H2O + CuSO4  CuSO4.5H2O
 White Blue

8.9.2  detection of Other elements 
Nitrogen, sulphur, halogens and phosphorus 
present in an organic compound are detected 
by “lassaigne’s test”. The elements present 
in the compound are converted from covalent 
form into the ionic form by fusing the 
compound with sodium metal. Following 
reactions take place:
 Na + C + N  NaCN
 2Na + S  Na2S
 Na + X   Na X 
    (X = Cl, Br or I) 

C, N, S and X come from organic compound.
Cyanide, sulphide and halide of sodium so 

formed on sodium fusion are extracted from 
the fused mass by boiling it with distilled 
water. This extract is known as sodium fusion 
extract.
(A) Test for Nitrogen 

Fig.8.13 Paper chromatography.
 Chromatography paper in two different The sodium fusion extract is boiled with 

shapes. iron(II) sulphate and then acidified with 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   284 10/10/2022   10:37:37 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 285

concentrated sulphuric acid. The formation bromine and a yellow precipitate, insoluble 
of Prussian blue colour confirms the presence in ammonium hydroxide shows the presence 
of nitrogen. Sodium cyanide first reacts of iodine.
with iron(II) sulphate and forms sodium  X– + Ag+ → AgX
hexacyanidoferrate(II). On heating with X represents a halogen – Cl, Br or I.
concentrated sulphuric acid some iron(II) If nitrogen or sulphur is also present in the 
ions are oxidised to iron(III) ions which compound, the sodium fusion extract is 
react with sodium hexacyanidoferrate(II) first boiled with concentrated nitric acid to 
to produce iron(III) hexacyanidoferrate(II) decompose cyanide or sulphide of sodium 
(ferriferrocyanide) which is Prussian blue in formed during Lassaigne’s test. These ions 
colour. would otherwise interfere with silver nitrate 
6CN– + Fe2+  →   [Fe(CN)6]

4– test for halogens.
3[Fe(CN)6]

4– + 4Fe3+  Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3.xH2O (D) Test for Phosphorus 
 Prussian blue The compound is heated with an oxidising 
(B) Test for Sulphur agent (sodium peroxide). The phosphorus 
(a)  The sodium fusion extract is acidified present in the compound is oxidised to 

with acetic acid and lead acetate is added phosphate. The solution is boiled with nitric 
to it. A black precipitate of lead sulphide acid and then treated with ammonium 
indicates the presence of sulphur. molybdate. A yellow colouration or precipitate 

  S2– + Pb2+ → PbS indicates the presence of phosphorus.     

     Black Na3PO4 + 3HNO3  →  H3PO4+3NaNO3

(b)  On treating sodium fusion extract with H3PO4   + 12(NH4)2MoO4   +   21HNO3 →
sodium nitroprusside, appearance of  Ammonium
a violet colour further indicates the   molybdate
presence of sulphur.  (NH4)3PO4.12MoO3 + 21NH4NO3 + 12H2O

S2– + [Fe(CN)5NO]2– → [Fe(CN)5NOS]4–  Ammonium
     Violet  phosphomolybdate

In case, nitrogen and sulphur both are 8.10  quantitatiVe analysis
present in an organic compound, sodium Quantitative analysis of compounds is very 
thiocyanate is formed. It gives blood red colour important in organic chemistry. It helps 
and no Prussian blue since there are no free chemists in the determination of mass per 
cyanide ions.

cent of elements present in a compound. You 
 Na + C + N + S →       NaSCN

have learnt in Unit-1 that mass per cent of 
 Fe3+ +SCN–   →      [Fe(SCN)]2+

elements is required for the determination of 
               Blood red emperical and molecular formula.

If sodium fusion is carried out with excess The percentage composition of elements 
of sodium, the thiocyanate decomposes to present in an organic compound is determined 
yield cyanide and sulphide. These ions give by the following methods:
their usual tests.
 NaSCN + 2Na   →  NaCN+Na2S

8.10.1  carbon and Hydrogen 

(C) Test for Halogens Both carbon and hydrogen are estimated in 

The sodium fusion extract is acidified with one experiment. A known mass of an organic 

nitric acid and then treated with silver nitrate. compound is burnt in the presence of  excess 

A white precipitate, soluble in ammonium of oxygen and copper(II) oxide. Carbon and 

hydroxide shows the presence of chlorine, hydrogen in the compound are oxidised to 
a yellowish precipitate, sparingly soluble in carbon dioxide and water respectively.
ammonium hydroxide shows the presence of CxHy + (x  +  y/4) O2 → x CO2  +  (y/2) H2O

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   285 10/10/2022   10:37:37 AM



286 chemistry

Fig.8.14 Estimation of carbon and hydrogen. Water and carbon dioxide formed on oxidation of substance 
are absorbed in anhydrous calcium chloride and potassium hydroxide solutions respectively 
contained in U tubes.

The mass of water produced is determined 8.10.2  nitrogen 
by passing the mixture through a weighed There are two methods for estimation of 
U-tube containing anhydrous calcium chloride. nitrogen: (i) Dumas method and (ii) Kjeldahl’s 
Carbon dioxide is absorbed in another U-tube method.
containing concentrated solution of potassium (i) Dumas method: The nitrogen containing 
hydroxide. These tubes are connected in series organic compound, when heated with copper 
(Fig. 8.14). The increase in masses of calcium oxide in an atmosphere of carbon dioxide, 
chloride and potassium hydroxide gives the yields free nitrogen in addition to carbon 
amounts of water and carbon dioxide from dioxide and water.
which the percentages of carbon and hydrogen C
are calculated. xHyNz + (2x  +  y/2) CuO  →  

Let the mass of organic compound be     x CO2 + y/2 H2O  +  z/2 N2 + (2x + y/2) Cu
m g, mass of water and carbon dioxide 
produced be m1 and m2 g respectively; Traces of nitrogen oxides formed, if 

any, are reduced to nitrogen by passing the 
Percentage of carbon= 12 × m

 2 ×100 gaseous mixture over a heated copper gauze. 
44 × m The mixture of gases so produced is collected 

2 × m over an aqueous solution of potassium 
Percentage of hydrogen  = 1 ×100

hydroxide which absorbs carbon dioxide. 
18 × m Nitrogen is collected in the upper part of the 

  Problem 8.20 graduated tube (Fig.8.15).
On complete combustion, 0.246 g of an Let the mass of organic compound  = m g
organic compound gave 0.198g of carbon Volume of nitrogen collected = V1 mL
dioxide and 0.1014g of water.  Determine 

Room temperature = T
the percentage composition of carbon 1K

and hydrogen in the compound. = P1V1 × 273
Volumeof nitrogen at STP

solution 760 ×T1

= 12 × 0.198 ×100
Percentageof carbon (Let it be V mL)

44 × 0.246 Where p1 and V1 are the pressure and 
   = 21.95% volume of nitrogen, p1 is different from the 

atmospheric pressure at which nitrogen gas 

= 2 × 0.1014 ×100
   Percentage of hydrogen is collected.  The value of p1 is obtained by 

18 × 0.246 the relation;
= 4.58% p1= Atmospheric pressure – Aqueous tension

22400 mL N2 at STP weighs 28 g.

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   286 10/10/2022   10:37:38 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 287

Fig. 8.15 Dumas method.  The organic compound yields nitrogen gas on heating it with 
copper(II) oxide in the presence of CO  gas. The mixture of gases is collected over 

2
potassium hydroxide solution in which CO  is absorbed and volume of nitrogen 

2
gas is determined.

28 ×V
V mL N2 at STP weighs = g = 28 × 41.9

22400 41.9mLof nitrogen weighs g
22400

28 ×V ×100
Percentage of nitrogen = 

22400 × m 28 × 41.9 ×100
Percentageof nitrogen =

22400 × 0.3
Problem 8.21 =17.46%
In Dumas’ method for estimation of 
nitrogen, 0.3g of an organic compound 
gave 50mL of nitrogen collected at 300K 
temperature and 715mm pressure. (ii) Kjeldahl’s method: The compound 
Calculate the percentage composition containing nitrogen is heated with concentrated 
of nitrogen in the compound. (Aqueous sulphuric acid. Nitrogen in the compound 
tension at 300K=15 mm) gets converted to ammonium sulphate 

(Fig. 8.16). The resulting acid mixture is then 
solution heated with excess of sodium hydroxide. 
Volume of nitrogen collected at 300K and The liberated ammonia gas is absorbed in 
715mm pressure is 50 mL an excess of standard solution of sulphuric 
Actual pressure = 715-15 =700 mm acid. The amount of ammonia produced is 

273× 700 × 50 determined by estimating the amount of 
Volumeof nitrogen at STP

300 × 760 sulphuric acid consumed in the reaction. It 

41.9mL is done by estimating unreacted sulphuric 
acid left after the absorption of ammonia by 

22,400 mL of N2 at STP weighs  =  28 g titrating it with standard alkali solution. The 
difference between the initial amount of acid 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   287 10/10/2022   10:37:38 AM



288 chemistry

Fig.8.16 Kjeldahl method. Nitrogen-containing compound is treated with concentrated H SO  to get 
2 4

ammonium sulphate which liberates ammonia on treating with NaOH; ammonia is absorbed 
in known volume of standard acid.

taken and that left after the reaction gives the 
amount of acid reacted with ammonia. = 14 × M × 2(V − V1 / 2) 100

Percentageof N ×
1000 m

Organic compound + H2SO4  →  (NH4)2SO4  

  Na2SO = 1.4 × M × 2(V − V / 2)
4 + 2NH3 + 2H2O m

2NH3   + H2SO4   →   (NH4)2SO4 Kjeldahl method is not applicable to 
Let the mass of organic compound taken = m g compounds containing nitrogen in nitro and 
Volume of H2SO4 of molarity, M,  azo groups and nitrogen present in the ring 
taken  =  V mL (e.g. pyridine) as nitrogen of these compounds 
Volume of NaOH of molarity, M, used for does not change to ammonium sulphate 
titration of excess of  H2SO4 = V1 mL under these conditions.
V1mL of NaOH of molarity M  

Problem 8.22
 = V1 /2 mL of  H2SO4 of molarity M
Volume of H2SO4 of molarity M unused During estimation of nitrogen present 
= (V - V in an organic compound by Kjeldahl’s 

1/2) mL
method, the ammonia evolved from 

(V- V1/2) mL of  H2SO4  of molarity M  0.5 g of the compound in Kjeldahl’s 
 =  2(V-V1/2) mL of NH3 solution of estimation of nitrogen, neutralized 10 mL 
molarity M. of 1 M H2SO4. Find out the percentage of 
1000 mL of 1 M NH3 solution contains nitrogen in the compound.
17g NH3 or 14 g of N solution           
2(V-V1/2) mL of  NH3 solution of molarity M 1 M of 10 mL H2SO4=1M of  20 mL NH
contains: 3

1000 mL of 1M ammonia contains 14 g 
14 × M × 2(V − V1 / 2)

g N nitrogen
  1000  20 mL of  1M ammonia contains  

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   288 10/10/2022   10:37:39 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 289

14 × 20 Percentage of halogen
 g  nitrogen

1000
= atomic mass of X × m

 1g
14×20×100  

Percentageof nitrogen = =56.0% molecular mass of AgX
1000×0.5    

Problem 8.23
8.10.3  halogens In Carius method of estimation of 
Carius method:  A known mass of an organic halogen, 0.15 g of an organic compound 
compound is heated with fuming nitric acid in gave 0.12 g of AgBr. Find out the 
the presence of silver nitrate contained in a hard percentage of bromine in the compound.
glass tube known as Carius tube, (Fig.8.17) solution 

Molar mass of AgBr = 108 + 80  
                                       = 188 g mol-1

188 g AgBr contains 80 g bromine
80 × 0.12

0.12 g AgBr contains  g bromine
188

80 × 0.12 ×100
Percentageof bromine =

188×0.15
= 34.04%

8.10.4  sulphur 
A known mass of an organic compound is 
heated in a Carius tube with sodium peroxide 
or fuming nitric acid. Sulphur present in the 
compound is oxidised to sulphuric acid.  It 
is precipitated as barium sulphate by adding 
excess of barium chloride solution in water. 
The precipitate is filtered, washed, dried and 
weighed. The percentage of sulphur can be 

Fig. 8.17 Carius method. Halogen containing calculated from the mass of barium sulphate.
organic compound is heated with fuming 
nitric acid in the presence of silver Let the mass of organic 
nitrate.   compound taken =  m g

and the mass of barium 
 in a furnace. Carbon and hydrogen present in   sulphate formed = m1g
the compound are oxidised to carbon dioxide 1 mol of BaSO4 = 233 g BaSO4 = 32 g sulphur
and water. The halogen present forms the 32 × m
corresponding silver halide (AgX). It is filtered, m1 g BaSO4 contains 1 ×100

 g sulphur
233 × m

washed, dried and weighed.
Let the mass of organic Percentageof sulphur = 32 × m1 ×100
  compound taken = m g 233 × m
Mass of AgX formed = m1 g 
1 mol of AgX contains 1 mol of  X
Mass of halogen in m1g of AgX Problem 8.24

In ulp ur sti
= atomic mass of X × m s h e m

1g ation, 0.157 g of an 
molecular mass of AgX organic compound gave 0.4813 g of 

 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   289 10/10/2022   10:37:39 AM



290 chemistry

percentage composition (100) and the sum of 
barium sulphate.  What is the percentage the percentages of all other elements. However, 
of sulphur in the compound? oxygen can also be estimated directly as follows:
solution   A definite mass of an organic compound is 
Molecular mass of BaSO4  = 137+32+64 decomposed by heating in a stream of nitrogen 
      = 233 g gas. The mixture of gaseous products containing 

oxygen is passed over red-hot coke when all 
233 g BaSO4 contains 32 g sulphur the oxygen is converted to carbon monoxide. 

32 × 0.4813 This mixture is passed through warm iodine 
0.4813 g BaSO4 contains g  
g  sulphur 233 pentoxide (I2O5) when  carbon monoxide is 

oxidised to carbon dioxide producing iodine.

Percentageof sulphur = 32 × 0.4813 ×100 Compound heat →  O2 + other gaseous   

233 × 0.157          products  
2C + O

= 42.10% 2 1373K→  2CO]× 5  (A)

I2O5 + 5CO → I2  +   5CO2]× 2 (B)

8.10.5  Phosphorus On making the amount of CO produced in 
A known mass of an organic compound is equation (A) equal to the amount of CO used 
heated with fuming nitric acid whereupon in equation (B) by multiplying the equations 
phosphorus present in the compound is (A) and (B) by 5 and 2 respectively; we find 
oxidised to phosphoric acid. It is precipitated that each mole of oxygen liberated from 
as ammonium phosphomolybdate, (NH4)3 

the compound will produce two moles of 
PO4.12MoO3, by adding ammonia and carbondioxide.
ammonium molybdate. Alternatively, Thus 88 g carbon dioxide is obtained if 32 g 
phosphoric acid may be precipitated as oxygen is liberated.
MgNH4PO4 by adding magnesia mixture which Let the mass of organic compound taken be m g 
on ignition yields Mg2P2O7. Mass of carbon dioxide produced be m1 g
Let the mass of organic compound taken ∴ m1 g carbon dioxide is obtained from 
= m g and mass of ammonium phospho 32 × m1
molydate = m g O

1g 88 2

Molar mass of (NH4)3PO4.12MoO3 = 1877g
∴ 32 × m ×100

Percentage of oxygen = 1 %
88 × m

Percentage of phosphorus = 31× m1 ×100 %
1877 × m The percentage of oxygen can be derived 

from the amount of iodine produced also.
If phosphorus is estimated as Mg2P2O7, Presently, the estimation of elements in 

Percentage of phosphorus = 62 × m1 ×100 × % an organic compound is carried out by using 
222  

microquantities of substances and automatic 
where, 222 u is the molar mass of Mg2P2O7, 

experimental techniques. The elements, 
m, the mass of organic compound taken, carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen present in a 
m1, the mass of Mg compound are determined by an apparatus 

2P2O7 formed and 62, the 
mass of two phosphorus atoms present in the known as CHN elemental analyser. The 
compound Mg2P2O7.

analyser requires only a very small amount 
of the substance (1-3 mg) and displays the 

8.10.6  Oxygen values on a screen within a short time. A 
The percentage of oxygen in an organic compound detailed discussion of such methods is beyond 
is usually found by difference between the total the scope of this book.

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   290 10/10/2022   10:37:39 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 291

summary

In this unit, we have learnt some basic concepts in structure and reactivity of organic 
compounds, which are formed due to covalent bonding. The nature of the covalent bonding 
in organic compounds can be described in terms of orbitals hybridisation concept, 
according to which carbon can have sp3, sp2 and sp hybridised orbitals. The sp3, sp2 and sp 
hybridised carbons are found in compounds like methane, ethene and ethyne respectively. 
The tetrahedral shape of methane, planar shape of ethene and linear shape of ethyne can 
be understood on the basis of this concept. A sp3 hybrid orbital can overlap with 1s orbital 
of hydrogen to give a carbon - hydrogen (C–H) single bond (sigma, σ bond). Overlap of a sp2 
orbital of one carbon with sp2 orbital of another results in the formation of a carbon–carbon 
σ bond. The unhybridised p orbitals on two adjacent carbons can undergo lateral (side-
by-side) overlap to give a pi (π) bond. Organic compounds can be represented by various 
structural formulas. The three dimensional representation of organic compounds on paper 
can be drawn by wedge and dash formula.

Organic compounds can be classified on the basis of their structure or the functional 
groups they contain. A functional group is an atom or group of atoms bonded together in a 
unique fashion and which determines the physical and  chemical properties of the compounds. 
The naming of the organic compounds is carried out by following a set of rules laid down by 
the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (iuPac). In IUPAC nomenclature, 
the names are correlated with the structure in such a way that the reader can deduce the 
structure from the name.

Organic reaction mechanism concepts are based on the structure of the substrate 
molecule, fission of a covalent bond, the attacking reagents, the electron displacement effects 
and the conditions of the reaction. These organic reactions involve breaking and making 
of covalent bonds. A covalent bond may be cleaved in heterolytic or homolytic fashion. 
A heterolytic cleavage yields carbocations or carbanions, while a homolytic cleavage gives 
free radicals as reactive intermediate. Reactions proceeding through heterolytic cleavage 
involve the complimentary pairs of reactive species. These are electron pair donor known as 
nucleophile and an electron pair acceptor known as electrophile. The inductive, resonance, 
electromeric and hyperconjugation effects may help in the polarisation of a bond making 
certain carbon atom or other atom positions as places of low or high electron densities.

Organic reactions can be broadly classified into following types; substitution, addition, 
elimination and rearrangement reactions. 

Purification, qualitative and quantitative analysis of organic compounds are carried out 
for determining their structures. The methods of purification namely : sublimation, distillation 
and differential extraction are based on the difference in one or more physical properties. 
Chromatography is a useful technique of separation, identification and purification of 
compounds. It is classified into two categories : adsorption and partition chromatography. 
Adsorption chromatography is based on differential adsorption of various components of a 
mixture on an adsorbent. Partition chromatography involves continuous partitioning of the 
components of a mixture between stationary and mobile phases. After getting the compound 
in a pure form, its qualitative analysis is carried out for detection of elements present in it. 
Nitrogen, sulphur, halogens and phosphorus are detected by lassaigne’s test. Carbon and 
hydrogen are estimated by determining the amounts of carbon dioxide and water produced. 
Nitrogen is estimated by dumas or Kjeldahl’s method and halogens by Carius method. 
Sulphur and phosphorus are estimated by oxidising them to sulphuric and phosphoric acids 
respectively. The percentage of oxygen is usually determined by difference between the total 
percentage (100) and the sum of percentages of all other elements present.

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   291 10/10/2022   10:37:39 AM



292 chemistry

ExERCISES

8.1 What are hybridisation states of each carbon atom in the following compounds ?
 CH2=C=O, CH3CH=CH2, (CH3)2CO, CH2=CHCN, C6H6

8.2 Indicate the σ and π bonds in the following molecules :
 C6H6, C6H12, CH2Cl2, CH2=C=CH2, CH3NO2, HCONHCH3

8.3 Write bond line formulas for : Isopropyl alcohol, 2,3-Dimethylbutanal, Heptan-4-one.
8.4 Give the IUPAC names of the following compounds :

 (a)  (b)   (c) 

 (d)  (e)  (f) Cl2CHCH2OH

8.5 Which of the following represents the correct IUPAC name for the compounds 
concer ned  ?  (a )  2 ,2 -D imethy lpentane  o r  2 -D imethy lpentane  (b ) 
2,4,7-Trimethyloctane or 2,5,7-Trimethyloctane (c) 2-Chloro-4-methylpentane or 
4-Chloro-2-methylpentane (d) But-3-yn-1-ol or But-4-ol-1-yne.

8.6 Draw formulas for the first five members of each homologous series beginning with 
the following compounds. (a) H–COOH (b) CH3COCH3 (c) H–CH=CH2

8.7 Give condensed and bond line structural formulas and identify the functional group(s) 
present, if any, for : 

 (a) 2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
 (b) 2-Hydroxy-1,2,3-propanetricarboxylic acid
 (c) Hexanedial
8.8 Identify the functional groups in the following compounds

 (a)    (b)   (c)   

8.9 Which of the two: O2NCH2CH2O
– or CH3CH2O

– is expected to be more stable and 
why?

8.10 Explain why alkyl groups act as electron donors when attached to a π system.
8.11 Draw the resonance structures for the following compounds. Show the electron shift 

using curved-arrow notation.
+ 

 (a) C6H5OH (b) C6H5NO2 (c) CH3CH=CHCHO (d) C6H5–CHO (e) C6H5–CH2 
+ 

(f) CH3CH=CH CH2

8.12 What are electrophiles and nucleophiles ? Explain with examples.
8.13 Identify the reagents shown in bold in the following equations as nucleophiles or 

electrophiles:

 (a) CH3COOH + HO– → CH3COO–+H2O 

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   292 10/10/2022   10:37:40 AM



organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 293

–
 (b) CH3COCH3+ C  N → (CH3)2C(CN)(OH) 

+
 (c) C6H6 + CH3C

   O → C6H5COCH3

8.14 Classify the following reactions in one of the reaction type studied in this unit.

 (a) CH3CH2Br + HS–  →  CH3CH2SH + Br–

 (b) (CH3)2C = CH2  +  HCI  →  (CH3)2CIC – CH3

 (c) CH3CH2Br  +  HO–  →  CH2 = CH2 + H2O + Br–

 (d) (CH3)3C– CH2OH + HBr  →  (CH3)2CBrCH2CH2CH3 + H2O 
8.15 What is the relationship between the members of following pairs of structures ? 

Are they structural or geometrical isomers or resonance contributors ?

 (a)   

 (b)    

 (c)     

8.16 For the following bond cleavages, use curved-arrows to show the electron flow and 
classify each as homolysis or heterolysis. Identify reactive intermediate produced 
as free radical, carbocation and carbanion.

 (a)  

 (b)  

 (c)  

 (d)  

8.17 Explain the terms Inductive and Electromeric effects. Which electron displacement 
effect explains the following correct orders of acidity of the carboxylic acids?

 (a) Cl3CCOOH > Cl2CHCOOH > ClCH2COOH
 (b) CH3CH2COOH > (CH3)2CHCOOH > (CH3)3C.COOH
8.18 Give a brief description of the principles of the following techniques taking an 

example in each case.
 (a) Crystallisation (b) Distillation  (c) Chromatography
8.19 Describe the method, which can be used to separate two compounds with different 

solubilities in a solvent S.
8.20 What is the difference between distillation, distillation under reduced pressure and 

steam distillation ?

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   293 10/10/2022   10:37:40 AM



294 chemistry

8.21 Discuss the chemistry of Lassaigne’s test.
8.22 Differentiate between the principle of estimation of nitrogen in an organic compound 

by (i) Dumas method  and (ii) Kjeldahl’s method.
8.23 Discuss the principle of estimation of halogens, sulphur and phosphorus present 

in an organic compound.
8.24 Explain the principle of paper chromatography.
8.25 Why is nitric acid added to sodium extract before adding silver nitrate for testing 

halogens?
8.26 Explain the reason for the fusion of an organic compound with metallic sodium for 

testing nitrogen, sulphur and halogens.
8.27 Name a suitable technique of separation of the components from a mixture of 

calcium sulphate and camphor.
8.28 Explain, why an organic liquid vaporises at a temperature below its boiling point 

in its steam distillation ?
8.29 Will CCl4 give white precipitate of AgCl on heating it with silver nitrate? Give reason 

for your answer.
8.30 Why is a solution of potassium hydroxide used to absorb carbon dioxide evolved 

during the estimation of carbon present in an organic compound?
8.31 Why is it necessary to use acetic acid and not sulphuric acid for acidification of 

sodium extract for testing sulphur by lead acetate test?
8.32 An organic compound contains 69% carbon and 4.8% hydrogen, the remainder 

being oxygen. Calculate the masses of carbon dioxide and water produced when 
0.20 g of this substance is subjected to complete combustion.

8.33 A sample of 0.50 g of an organic compound was treated according to Kjeldahl’s 
method. The ammonia evolved was absorbed in 50 ml of 0.5 M H2SO4. The residual 
acid required 60 mL of 0.5 M solution of NaOH for neutralisation. Find the percentage 
composition of nitrogen in the compound.

8.34 0.3780 g of an organic chloro compound gave 0.5740 g of silver chloride in Carius 
estimation. Calculate the percentage of chlorine present in the compound.

8.35 In the estimation of sulphur by Carius method, 0.468 g of an organic sulphur 
compound afforded 0.668 g of barium sulphate. Find out the percentage of sulphur 
in the given compound. 

8.36 In the organic compound CH2 = CH – CH2 – CH2 – C ≡ CH, the pair of hydridised 
orbitals involved in the formation of: C2 – C3 bond is: 

 (a) sp – sp2 (b) sp – sp3 (c) sp2 – sp3 (d) sp3 – sp3

8.37 In the Lassaigne’s test for nitrogen in an organic compound, the Prussian blue 
colour is obtained due to the formation of:

 (a) Na4[Fe(CN)6] (b) Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3 (c) Fe2[Fe(CN)6] (d) Fe3[Fe(CN)6]4
8.38 Which of the following carbocation is most stable ?

+ + + +
 (a) (CH3)3C. C  H2 (b) (CH3)3C   (c) CH3CH2C  H2 (d) CH3C  H CH2CH3

8.39 The best and latest technique for isolation, purification and separation of organic 
compounds is:

 (a) Crystallisation (b) Distillation (c) Sublimation (d) Chromatography
8.40 The reaction:
 CH3CH2I + KOH(aq) → CH3CH2OH + KI
 is classified as :
 (a) electrophilic substitution (b) nucleophilic substitution
 (c) elimination (d) addition

2024-25

Unit 8.indd   294 10/10/2022   10:37:40 AM