Unit 4

CHEMiCAL BOnDinG AnD 
MOLECULAR StRUCtURE

Scientists are constantly discovering new compounds, 
orderly arranging the facts about them, trying to explain 
with the existing knowledge, organising to modify the 
earlier views or evolve theories for explaining the newly 

After studying this Unit, you will be observed facts.
able to 
•	 unders tand 	 Kösse l -Lew is	

approach to chemical bonding; 

•	 explain	 the	 octet	 rule	 and	 its	 Matter is made up of one or different type of elements. 
limitations,	draw	Lewis	structures	 Under	normal	 conditions	no	other	 element	 exists	as	an	
of simple molecules; independent	atom	in	nature,	except	noble	gases.	However,	

•	 explain	the	formation	of	different	 a	group	of	atoms	is	found	to	exist	together	as	one	species	
types of bonds; having	characteristic	properties.	Such	a	group	of	atoms	

is	called	a	molecule.	Obviously	there	must	be	some	force	
•	 describe	 the	VSEPR	theory	and	

predict the geometry of simple which holds these constituent atoms together in the 
molecules; molecules. the attractive force which holds various 

constituents (atoms, ions, etc.) together in different 
•	 expla in	 the	 va lence	 bond	 chemical species is called a chemical bond.	Since	the	

approach for the formation of formation of chemical compounds takes place as a result of 
covalent	bonds;

combination	of	atoms	of	various	elements	in	different	ways,	
•	 predict	the	directional	properties	 it raises many questions. Why do atoms combine? Why are 

of	covalent	bonds; only certain combinations possible? Why do some atoms 
•	 explain	 the	 different	 types	 of	 combine while certain others do not? Why do molecules 

hybridisation		involving	s, p and possess	definite	shapes?	To	answer	such	questions	different	
d orbitals and draw shapes of theories	and	concepts	have	been	put	 forward	 from	time	
simple	covalent	molecules; to	time.	These	are	Kössel-Lewis	approach,	Valence	Shell	

•	 describe	 the	molecular	 orbital	 Electron	Pair	Repulsion	(VSEPR)	Theory,	Valence	Bond	(VB)	
theory of homonuclear diatomic Theory	and	Molecular	Orbital	(MO)	Theory.	The	evolution	
molecules; of	 various	 theories	 of	 valence	 and	 the	 interpretation	 of	

the	nature	of	chemical	bonds	have	closely	been	related	to	
•	 explain	the	concept	of	hydrogen	 the	developments	 in	 the	understanding	of	 the	structure	

bond.
of	atom,	the	electronic	configuration	of	elements	and	the	
periodic	table.	Every	system	tends	to	be	more	stable	and	
bonding is nature’s way of lowering the energy of the system 
to attain stability.

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   100 9/12/2022   9:36:09 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 101

4.1 KÖSSEL-LEwiS AppROACH tO the	number	of	valence	electrons.	This	number	
CHEMiCAL BOnDinG  of	 valence	 electrons	 helps	 to	 calculate	 the	

In	order	to	explain	the	formation	of	chemical	 common or group valence of the element. 
bond in terms of electrons, a number of The	group	valence	of	the	elements	is	generally	
attempts were made, but it was only in either	equal	to	the	number	of	dots	in	Lewis	
1916	 when	 Kössel	 and	 Lewis	 succeeded	 symbols or 8 minus the number of dots or 
independently	 in	 giving	 a	 satisfactory	 valence	electrons.
explanation.	 They	were	 the	 first	 to	 provide	 Kössel, in relation to chemical bonding, 
some	logical	explanation	of	valence	which	was	 drew attention to the following facts:
based on the inertness of noble gases. •	 In the periodic table,  the highly 

Lewis	 pictured	 the	 atom	 in	 terms	 of	 a	 electronegative	 halogens	 and	 the	highly	
positively	charged	‘Kernel’	(the	nucleus	plus	 electropositive	alkali	metals	are	separated	
the	inner	electrons)	and	the	outer	shell	that	 by the noble gases;
could	 accommodate	 a	maximum	 of	 eight	 •	 The	 formation	 of	 a	 negative	 ion	 from	a	
electrons.	He,	 further	 assumed	 that	 these	 halogen	 atom	 and	 a	 positive	 ion	 from	
eight electrons occupy the corners of a cube an alkali metal atom is associated with 
which	surround	the	‘Kernel’.	Thus	the	single	 the gain and loss of an electron by the 
outer shell electron of sodium would occupy respective	atoms;
one corner of the cube, while in the case of •	 The	 negative	 and	 positive	 ions	 thus	
a noble gas all the eight corners would be formed attain stable noble gas electronic 
occupied.	This	octet	of	electrons,	represents	 configurations.	The	noble	gases	(with	the	
a particularly stable electronic arrangement. exception	of	helium	which	has	a	duplet	
Lewis postulated that atoms achieve of	 electrons)	 have	 a	 particularly	 stable	
the stable octet when they are linked by outer	 shell	 configuration	of	 eight	 (octet)	
chemical bonds. In the case of sodium and electrons, ns2np6. 
chlorine, this can happen by the transfer of •	 The	negative	and	positive	ions	are	stabilized	
an electron from sodium to chlorine thereby by electrostatic attraction.
giving	 the	Na+ and Cl– ions. In the case of 
other molecules like Cl2,	H2, F2, etc., the bond For	example,	the	formation	of	NaCl	from	
is formed by the sharing of a pair of electrons sodium	and	chlorine,	according	to	the	above	
between the atoms. In the process each atom scheme,	can	be	explained	as:	
attains a stable outer octet of electrons. Na																→							Na+   +    e–

Lewis Symbols: In the formation of a [Ne]	3s1																			[Ne]	
molecule, only the outer shell electrons take Cl  +  e–          →        Cl–
part in chemical combination and they are [Ne]	3s2	3p5													[Ne]	3s2	3p6	or	[Ar]	
known as valence electrons.	The	inner	shell	 Na+  +  Cl–     →								NaCl	or	Na+Cl–
electrons are well protected and are generally 
not	 involved	 in	 the	 combination	 process. Similarly	 the	 formation	 of	CaF2 may be 
G.N.	Lewis,	an	American	chemist	introduced	 shown as:
simple	notations	to	represent	valence	electrons	 Ca                →       Ca2+  +  2e–

in	an	atom.	These	notations	are	called	Lewis [Ar]4s2																				[Ar]
symbols.	For	example,	the	Lewis	symbols	for	 F  + e–            →       F–

the elements of second period are as under: [He]	2s2 2p5													[He]	2s2 2p6		or	[Ne]
Ca2+ + 2F–     →       CaF2   or  Ca2+(F– )2
the bond formed, as a result of the 

Significance of Lewis Symbols :	 The	 electrostatic attraction between the 
number of dots around the symbol represents positive and negative ions was termed as 

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   101 9/12/2022   9:36:09 AM



102 chemistry

the electrovalent bond. the electrovalence chlorine atoms attain the outer shell octet of 
is thus equal to the number of unit charge(s) the	nearest	noble	gas	(i.e.,	argon).	
on the ion.	 Thus,	 calcium	 is	 assigned	 a	
positive	electrovalence	of	two,	while	chlorine	 the dots represent electrons. Such 
a	negative	electrovalence	of	one.	 structures are referred to as Lewis dot 

structures.
Kössel’s	postulations	provide	the	basis	for	

the	modern	concepts	regarding	ion-formation	 The	Lewis	dot	structures	can	be	written	for	
by electron transfer and the formation of ionic other molecules also, in which the combining 
crystalline	compounds.	His	views	have	proved	 atoms	may	 be	 identical	 or	 different.	 The	
to	be	of	great	value	in	the	understanding	and	 important conditions being that:
systematisation of the ionic compounds. At •	 Each	bond	is	formed	as	a	result	of	sharing	
the same time he did recognise the fact that of an electron pair between the atoms.
a	large	number	of	compounds	did	not	fit	into	 •	 Each	combining	atom	contributes	at	least	
these concepts. one electron to the shared pair.

4.1.1 Octet Rule •	 The	 combining	 atoms	 attain	 the	 outer-
shell	noble	gas	configurations	as	a	result	

Kössel	 and	 Lewis	 in	 1916	 developed	 an	 of the sharing of electrons.
important theory of chemical combination 
between atoms known as electronic theory •	 Thus	 in	water	 and	 carbon	 tetrachloride	
of chemical bonding. According to this, molecules,	 formation	 of	 covalent	 bonds	
atoms  can combine either by transfer of can be represented as:
valence	electrons	from	one	atom	to	another	
(gaining	or	 losing)	 or	by	 sharing	of	 valence	
electrons	 in	order	 to	have	an	octet	 in	 their	
valence	shells.	This	is	known	as	octet rule.

4.1.2 Covalent Bond
Langmuir  (1919)	 ref ined	 the	 Lewis	
postulations by abandoning the idea of 
the stationary cubical arrangement of the 
octet, and by introducing the term covalent 
bond.	 The	 Lewis-Langmuir	 theory	 can	 be	 thus, when two atoms share one 
understood by considering the formation of electron pair they are said to be joined by 
the chlorine molecule, Cl a single covalent bond. In many compounds 

2.	The	Cl	atom	with	
electronic	configuration,	 [Ne]3s2	3p5, is one we	have	multiple bonds	between	atoms.	The	
electron	 short	 of	 the	 argon	 configuration.	 formation	of	multiple	bonds	envisages	sharing	
The	 formation	 of	 the	 Cl	 of more than one electron pair between two 

2 molecule can be 
understood in terms of the sharing of a pair atoms. if two atoms share two pairs of 
of electrons between the two chlorine atoms, electrons, the covalent bond between them 
each chlorine atom contributing one electron is called a double bond. For	example,	in	the	
to the shared pair. In the process both carbon	dioxide	molecule,	we	have	two	double	

bonds	between	the	carbon	and	oxygen	atoms.	
Similarly	in	ethene	molecule	the	two	carbon	
atoms are joined by a double bond.

   or Cl – Cl
Covalent bond between two Cl atoms Double bonds in CO2 molecule

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   102 9/12/2022   9:36:09 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 103

number	of	valence	electrons.	For	example,	
for the CO2–

3 	ion,	the	two	negative	charges	
indicate that there are two additional 
electrons	 than	 those	 provided	 by	 the	
neutral	atoms.	For	NH+

4	ion,	one	positive	
charge indicates the loss of one electron 
from the group of neutral atoms.

C2H4 molecule •	 Knowing	 the	 chemical	 symbols	 of	 the	
when combining atoms share three combining	atoms	and	having	knowledge	

electron pairs as in the case of two nitrogen of the skeletal structure of the compound 
atoms in the n2 molecule and the two (known	or	guessed	intelligently),	it	is	easy	
carbon atoms in the ethyne molecule, a to distribute the total number of electrons 
triple bond is formed. as bonding shared pairs between the 

atoms in proportion to the total bonds.
•	 In	general	the	least	electronegative	atom	

occupies the central position in the 
molecule/ion.	For	example	in	the	NF3 and 

N CO2–
2 molecule 3 , nitrogen and carbon are the central 

atoms	 whereas	 fluorine	 and	 oxygen	
occupy the terminal positions.

•	 After accounting for the shared pairs of 
electrons for single bonds, the remaining 

C electron	 pairs	 are	 either	 utilized	 for	
2H2 molecule

multiple bonding or remain as the lone 
4.1.3 Lewis Representation of Simple pairs.	 The	 basic	 requirement	 being	

Molecules (the Lewis Structures) that each bonded atom gets an octet of 
electrons.

the Lewis dot structures provide a picture 
of bonding in molecules and ions in terms of 	 Lewis	representations	of	a	few	molecules/	
the shared pairs of electrons and the octet ions	are	given	in	Table	4.1.
rule.	While	such	a	picture	may	not	explain	
the	 bonding	 and	 behaviour	 of	 a	molecule	 table 4.1 the Lewis Representation of 
completely, it does help in understanding the Some Molecules
formation and properties of a molecule to a 
large	extent.	Writing	of	Lewis	dot	structures	of	
molecules	is,	therefore,	very	useful.	The	Lewis	
dot structures can be written by adopting the 
following steps:
•	 The	 total	 number	 of	 electrons	 required	

for writing the structures are obtained 
by	 adding	 the	 valence	 electrons	 of	 the	
combining	atoms.	For	example,	in	the	CH4 
molecule	there	are	eight	valence	electrons	
available	for	bonding	(4	from	carbon	and	
4	from	the	four	hydrogen	atoms).

•	 For	anions,	each	negative	charge	would	
mean addition of one electron. For cations, 
each	 positive	 charge	 would	 result	 in	 * Each H atom attains the configuration of helium 
subtraction of one electron from the total (a duplet of electrons)

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   103 9/12/2022   9:36:10 AM



104 chemistry

problem 4.1 each	of	the	oxygen	atoms	completing	the	
Write	 the	 Lewis	 dot	 structure	 of	 CO	 octets	on	oxygen	atoms.	This,	however,	
molecule. does not complete the octet on nitrogen 

if the remaining two electrons constitute 
Solution lone pair on it.
Step 1.	Count	the	total	number	of	valence	
electrons	of	carbon	and	oxygen	atoms.	
The	outer	(valence)	shell	configurations	
of	carbon	and	oxygen	atoms	are:	2s2 2p2 	 Hence	we	have	 to	 resort	 to	multiple	
and 2s2 2p4,	 respectively.	 The	 valence	 bonding between nitrogen and one of 
electrons	available	are	4	+	6	=10. the	oxygen	atoms	(in	this	case	a	double	
Step 2.	The	skeletal	structure	of	CO	is	 bond).	This	leads	to	the	following	Lewis	
written as: C  O dot structures.

Step 3.	Draw	a	single	bond	(one	shared	
electron	 pair)	 between	 C	 and	O	 and	
complete the octet on O, the remaining 
two electrons are the lone pair on C.

 This	 does	 not	 complete	 the	 octet	 on	
carbon	and	hence	we	have	to	resort	to	
multiple	bonding	 (in	 this	case	a	 triple	 4.1.4 Formal Charge
bond)	 between	C	 and	O	 atoms.	 This	
satisfies	the	octet	rule	condition	for	both	 Lewis	 dot	 structures,	 in	 general,	 do	 not	
atoms. represent the actual shapes of the molecules. 

In case of polyatomic ions, the net charge is 
possessed by the ion as a whole and not by 
a	particular	atom.	It	is,	however,	feasible	to	
assign	 a	 formal	 charge	 on	 each	 atom.	 The	
formal charge of an atom in a polyatomic 

problem 4.2 molecule or ion may be defined as the 
difference	 between	 the	 number	 of	 valence	

Write	the	Lewis	structure	of	the	nitrite	 electrons of that atom in an isolated or free 
ion,	NO– 

2 . state and the number of electrons assigned 
to	 that	 atom	 in	 the	 Lewis	 structure.	 It	 is	

Solution expressed	as	:
Step 1. Count the total number of 
valence	electrons	of	the	nitrogen	atom,	 Formal	charge	(F.C.)		
the	oxygen	atoms	and	the	additional	one	 on	an	atom	in	a	Lewis	 =
negative	charge	(equal	to	one	electron). structure

	 N(2s2 2p3),	O	(2s2 2p4)
	 5	+	(2	×	6)	+1	=	18	electrons	 total	number	of	valence	 total number of non 

electrons in the free — bonding	(lone	pair)	
Step 2.	The	skeletal	structure	of	NO –

2 is atom electrons
written	as	:		O			N			O total number of  
Step 3.	Draw	a	single	bond	(one	shared	 —	(1/2)	 bonding	(shared)	
electron	pair)	between	the	nitrogen	and	 electrons

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   104 9/12/2022   9:36:10 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 105

The	counting is based on the assumption 4.1.5 Limitations of the Octet Rule
that the atom in the molecule owns one The	octet	rule,	though	useful,	is	not	universal.	
electron of each shared pair and both the It is quite useful for understanding the 
electrons of a lone pair. structures of most of the organic compounds 

Let	us	consider	the	ozone	molecule	(O3).	 and it applies mainly to the second period 
The	Lewis	structure	of	O3 may be drawn as: elements	of	the	periodic	table.	There	are	three	

types	of	exceptions	to	the	octet	rule.	
The incomplete octet of the central atom
In some compounds, the number of electrons 
surrounding the central atom is less than 
eight.	This	is	especially	the	case	with	elements	
having	 less	 than	 four	 valence	 electrons.	

The	atoms	have	been	numbered	as	1,	2	 Examples	are	LiCl,	BeH2	and	BCl3. 

and	3.	The	formal	charge	on:
•	 The	central	O	atom	marked	1

Li,	Be	and	B	have	1,	2	and	3	valence	electrons	
=	6	–	2	–	 1  (6)	=	+1

2 only.	Some	other	such	compounds	are	AlCl3 
•	 The	end	O	atom	marked	2 and	BF3.

Odd-electron molecules
=	6	–	4	–	 1 	(4)	=	0 In molecules with an odd number of electrons 

2 like	 nitric	 oxide,	 NO	 and	 nitrogen	 dioxide,	
•	 The	end	O	atom	marked	3 NO2,	the	octet	rule	is	not	satisfied	for	all	the	

atoms
=	6	–	6	–	 1 	(2)	=	–1

2
Hence,	we	 represent	O3 along with the 

formal charges as follows: The expanded octet
Elements	in	and	beyond	the	third	period	of	
the	periodic	table	have,	apart	from	3s	and	3p 
orbitals,	3d	orbitals	also	available	for	bonding.	
In a number of compounds of these elements 
there	are	more	than	eight	valence	electrons	

We must understand that formal charges around	the	central	atom.	This	is	termed	as	
do not indicate real charge separation within the	expanded	octet.	Obviously	the	octet	rule	
the molecule. Indicating the charges on the does not apply in such cases. 
atoms	 in	 the	Lewis	 structure	only	helps	 in	
keeping	 track	 of	 the	 valence	 electrons	 in	 Some	of	the	examples	of	such	compounds	

are:	 PF
the molecule. Formal charges help in the 5,	 SF6,	 H2SO4 and a number of 

coordination compounds.
selection of the lowest energy structure from 
a	number	of	possible	Lewis	structures	for	a	
given	species. Generally the lowest energy 
structure is the one with the smallest 
formal charges on the atoms. the formal 
charge is a factor based on a pure covalent 
view of bonding in which electron pairs 
are shared equally by neighbouring atoms. 

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   105 9/12/2022   9:36:11 AM



106 chemistry

Interestingly, sulphur also forms many affinity,	is	the	negative	of	the	energy	change	
compounds in which the octet rule is obeyed. accompanying electron gain.    
In	sulphur	dichloride,	the	S	atom	has	an	octet	 Obviously ionic bonds will be formed 
of electrons around it. more easily between elements with 

comparatively low ionization enthalpies 
and elements with comparatively high 

Other drawbacks of the octet theory negative value of electron gain enthalpy. 

•	 It is clear that octet rule is based upon Most	 ionic	 compounds	 have	 cations	
derived	 from	metallic	 elements	 and	 anions	

the chemical inertness of noble gases. from	non-metallic	elements.	The	ammonium	
However,	some	noble	gases	(for	example	 ion,	 NH +

4 	 (made	 up	 of	 two	 non-metallic	
xenon	 and	 krypton)	 also	 combine	with	 elements)	is	an	exception.	It	forms	the	cation	
oxygen	and	fluorine	to	form	a	number	of	 of a number of ionic compounds.
compounds like XeF2,	KrF2, XeOF2 etc. Ionic compounds in the crystalline 

•	 This	theory	does	not	account	for	the	shape	 state	 consist	 of	 orderly	 three-dimensional	
of molecules. arrangements of cations and anions held 

•	 It	does	not	explain	the	relative	stability	of	 together by coulombic interaction energies. 
the molecules being totally silent about These	 compounds	 crystallise	 in	 different	
the energy of a molecule. crystal	structures	determined	by	the	size	of	

the ions, their packing arrangements and 
4.2 iOniC OR ELECtROvALEnt BOnD other	factors.	The	crystal	structure	of	sodium	
From	the	Kössel and	Lewis	treatment	of	the	 chloride,	 NaCl	 (rock	 salt),	 for	 example	 is	
formation of an ionic bond, it follows that the shown below.
formation of ionic compounds would primarily 
depend upon:
•	 The	ease	of	formation	of	the	positive	and	

negative	ions	from	the	respective	neutral	
atoms; 

•	 The	 arrangement	 of	 the	 positive	 and	
negative	 ions	 in	 the	 solid,	 that	 is,	 the	
lattice of the crystalline compound.
The	 formation	of	 a	positive	 ion	 involves	

ionization,	 i.e.,	 removal	 of	 electron(s)	 from	
the	 neutral	 atom	 and	 that	 of	 the	 negative	
ion	involves	the	addition	of	electron(s)	to	the	 Rock salt structure
neutral atom.

M(g)							    →     M+(g)	+	e– ; In ionic solids, the sum of the electron gain 
enthalpy	and	the	ionization	enthalpy	may	be	

	 																											Ionization	enthalpy	 positive	 but	 still	 the	 crystal	 structure	 gets	
X(g)	+	e–     →     X – (g)	;	 stabilized	due	to	the	energy	released	in	the	
																									Electron	gain	enthalpy formation	of	the	crystal	lattice.	For	example:	

the	 ionization	enthalpy	 for	Na+
M+(g)		+	X	–(g)		→				MX(s) (g)	 formation	

from	Na(g)	is	495.8	kJ	mol–1 ; while the electron 
The	electron gain enthalpy, ∆egH, is the gain	 enthalpy	 for	 the	 change	 Cl(g)	 +	 e–→ 

enthalpy	change	(Unit	3),	when	a	gas	phase	 Cl– (g)	is,	–	348.7	kJ	mol–1	only.	The	sum	of	the	
atom in its ground state gains an electron. two,	147.1	kJ	mol-1 is more than compensated 
The	electron	gain	process	may	be	exothermic	 for by the enthalpy of lattice formation of 
or	endothermic.	The	ionization,	on	the	other	 NaCl(s)	(–788	kJ	mol–1).	Therefore,	the	energy	
hand,	 is	 always	 endothermic.	 Electron	 released in the processes is more than the 

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   106 9/12/2022   9:36:11 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 107

energy absorbed. thus a qualitative measure 
of the stability of an ionic compound 
is provided by its enthalpy of  lattice 
formation and not simply by achieving 
octet of electrons around the ionic species 
in gaseous state.

Since	lattice	enthalpy	plays	a	key	role	
in the formation of ionic compounds, it is 
important that we learn more about it.
4.2.1 Lattice Enthalpy
the Lattice Enthalpy of an ionic solid 
is defined as the energy required to 
completely separate one mole of a solid 
ionic compound into gaseous constituent 
ions.	 For	 example,	 the	 lattice	 enthalpy	 of	
NaCl	 is	788	kJ	mol–1.	This	means	that	788	 Fig. 4.1 The bond length in a covalent  
kJ	of	energy	is	required	to	separate	one	mole	 molecule AB. 
of	solid	NaCl	into	one	mole	of	Na+	(g)	and	one	 R = rA + rB (R is the bond length and rA and rB are 
mole of Cl– (g)	to	an	infinite	distance. the covalent radii of atoms A and B  

respectively)
This	process	involves	both	the	attractive	

forces between ions of opposite charges in the same molecule. the van der waals 
and	 the	 repulsive	 forces	 between	 ions	 of	 radius represents the overall size of the 
like	 charge.	 The	 solid	 crystal	 being	 three- atom which includes its valence shell in a 
dimensional; it is not possible to calculate nonbonded situation. Further,	the	van	der	
lattice enthalpy directly from the interaction Waals radius is half of the distance between 
of forces of attraction and repulsion only. two similar atoms in separate molecules in 
Factors associated with the crystal geometry a	solid.	Covalent	and	van	der	Waals	radii	of	
have	to	be	included. chlorine	are	depicted	in	Fig.	4.2.		
4.3 BOnD pARAMEtERS

4.3.1 Bond Length rc = 99 pm 198
pm

Bond length is defined as the equilibrium 
distance between the nuclei of two bonded 
atoms in a molecule.	 Bond	 lengths	 are	
measured	by	spectroscopic,	X-ray	diffraction	
and	 electron-diffraction	 techniques	 about	
which	you	will	learn	in	higher	classes.	Each	
atom of the bonded pair contributes to the 
bond	length	(Fig.	4.1).	In	the	case	of	a	covalent	
bond, the contribution from each atom is 
called	the	covalent	radius	of	that	atom.	

the covalent radius is measured 
approximately as the radius of an atom’s 
core which is in contact with the core of an Fig. 4.2 Covalent and van der Waals radii in 

a chlorine molecule. The inner circles 
adjacent atom in a bonded situation. The	 correspond to the size of the chlorine 
covalent	radius	is	half	of	the	distance	between	 atom (rvdw and rc are van der Waals and 
two	similar	atoms	joined	by	a	covalent	bond	 covalent radii respectively). 

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   107 9/12/2022   9:36:11 AM

360
pm

pm
0

18
=

r vd
w



108 chemistry

Some	 typical	 average	 bond	 lengths	 for	 table 4.2 Average Bond Lengths for Some 
single, double and triple bonds are shown in Single, Double and triple Bonds
Table	 4.2.	Bond	 lengths	 for	 some	 common	
molecules	are	given	in	Table	4.3. Bond type Covalent Bond 

Length (pm)
The	 covalent	 radii	 of	 some	 common	

elements	are	listed	in	Table	4.4. O–H 96
C–H 107

4.3.2 Bond Angle N–O 136
It	is	defined	as	the	angle	between	the	orbitals	 C–O 143

C–N 143
containing bonding electron pairs around the C–C 154
central	atom	in	a	molecule/complex	ion.	Bond	 C=O 121
angle	 is	 expressed	 in	 degree	which	 can	 be	 N=O 122
experimentally	determined	by	spectroscopic	 C=C 133
methods.	 It	 gives	 some	 idea	 regarding	 the	 C=N 138
distribution of orbitals around the central C≡N 116
atom	in	a	molecule/complex	ion	and	hence	it	 C≡C 120
helps us in determining its shape. For table 4.3 Bond Lengths in Some Common 
example	H–O–H	bond	angle	in	water	can	be	 Molecules
represented as under :

Molecule Bond Length (pm)
H2	(H	–	H) 74
F2	(F	–	F) 144

4.3.3 Bond Enthalpy Cl2	(Cl	–	Cl) 199
It	is	defined	as	the	amount	of	energy	required	 Br2	(Br	–	Br) 228
to break one mole of bonds of a particular I2	(I	–	I) 267
type between two atoms in a gaseous state. N2	(N	≡	N) 109
The	unit	 of	 bond	 enthalpy	 is	 kJ	mol–1. For O2	(O	=	O) 121
example,	the	H	–	H	bond	enthalpy	in	hydrogen	 HF	(H	–	F) 92
molecule	is	435.8	kJ	mol–1. HCl	(H	–	Cl) 127
H2(g)	→	H(g)	+	H(g);	∆aH

	=	435.8	kJ	mol–1 HBr	(H	–	Br) 141
HI	(H	–	I) 160

Similarly	the	bond	enthalpy	for	molecules	
containing	multiple	bonds,	for	example	O2 and table 4.4  Covalent Radii, *rcov/(pm)
N2 will be as under :
O2	(O	=	O)	(g)	→	O(g)	+	O(g);	
                                               ∆aH

	=	498	kJ	mol–1

N2	(N	≡	N)	(g)	→	N(g)	+	N(g);	
                                             ∆aH

	=	946.0	kJ	mol–1

It is important that larger the bond 
dissociation enthalpy, stronger will be the 
bond in the molecule. For a heteronuclear 
diatomic	molecules	like	HCl,	we	have
HCl	(g)	→	H(g)	+	Cl	(g);	∆aH

	=	431.0	kJ	mol–1

In case of polyatomic molecules, the 
measurement of bond strength is more 
complicated.	 For	 example	 in	 case		of	 H2O * The values cited are for single bonds, except where 
molecule, the enthalpy needed to break the otherwise indicated in parenthesis. (See also Unit 3 for 
two	O	–	H	bonds	is	not	the	same. periodic trends).

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   108 9/12/2022   9:36:11 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 109

H2O(g)		→		H(g)	+	OH(g);	∆aH

1 	=		502	kJ	mol–1

OH(g)		→		H(g)	+	O(g);	∆ 
aH2 	=	427	kJ	mol–1

The	 difference	 in	 the	∆aH
	 value	 shows	

that	 the	 second	 O	 –	 H	 bond	 undergoes	
some change because of changed chemical 
environment.	 This	 is	 the	 reason	 for	 some	
difference	in	energy	of	the	same	O	–	H	bond	
in different molecules like C2H5OH	(ethanol)	
and	water.	Therefore	in	polyatomic	molecules	
the term mean or average bond enthalpy 
is	used.	It	is	obtained	by	dividing	total	bond	
dissociation enthalpy by the number of bonds 
broken	as	explained	below	in	case	of	water	
molecule,

502 + 427 Fig. 4.3 Resonance in the O3 molecule
Average	bond	enthalpy	=	

2
	 																																=	464.5	kJ	mol–1 (structures I and II represent the two canonical 

forms while the structure III is the resonance hybrid)
4.3.4 Bond Order
in the Lewis description of covalent bond, In	both	structures	we	have	a	O–O	single	
the Bond Order is given by the number bond	and	a	O=O	double	bond.	The	normal	 
of bonds between the two atoms in a O–O	 and	 O=O	 bond	 lengths	 are	 148	 pm	
molecule.	 The	 bond	 order,	 for	 example	 in	 and	 121	 pm	 respectively.	 Experimentally	
H2	(with	a	single	shared	electron	pair),	in	O2 determined	 oxygen-oxygen	bond	 lengths	 in	
(with	 two	 shared	 electron	 pairs)	 and	 in	N2 the O3	molecule	are	same	(128	pm).	Thus	the	
(with	 three	 shared	 electron	 pairs)	 is	 1,2,3	 oxygen-oxygen	bonds	in	the	O3 molecule are 
respectively.	 Similarly	 in	CO	 (three	 shared	 intermediate between a double and a single 
electron	 pairs	 between	C	 and	O)	 the	 bond	 bond.	Obviously,	this	cannot	be	represented	
order	 is	 3.	 For	N2, bond	order	 is	 3	 and	 its	 by	either	of	the	two	Lewis	structures	shown	

	is	946	kJ	mol–1; being one of the highest above.	
for a diatomic molecule. The	concept	of	resonance	was	introduced	

isoelectronic molecules and ions have to	deal	with	the	type	of	difficulty	experienced	
identical bond orders; for example, F2 and in the depiction of accurate structures of 
O2–

2  have bond order 1. n2, CO and nO+ have molecules like O3. According to the concept 
bond order 3. of resonance, whenever a single Lewis 

A general correlation useful for structure cannot describe a molecule 
understanding the stablities of molecules accurately, a number of structures with 
is that: with increase in bond order, similar energy, positions of nuclei, bonding 
bond enthalpy increases and bond length and non-bonding pairs of electrons are 
decreases. taken as the canonical structures of the 

hybrid which describes the molecule 
4.3.5 Resonance Structures accurately.	Thus	for	O3, the two structures 
It	is	often	observed	that	a	single	Lewis	structure	 shown	 above	 constitute	 the	 canonical	
is inadequate for the representation of a structures or resonance structures and 
molecule	in	conformity	with	its	experimentally	 their hybrid i.e., the III structure represents 
determined	 parameters.	 For	 example,	 the	 the structure of O3	more	accurately.	This	is	
ozone, O3 molecule can be equally represented also called resonance hybrid.	Resonance	is	
by the structures I and II shown below: represented by a double headed arrow.

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   109 9/12/2022   9:36:11 AM



110 chemistry

Some	of	the	other	examples	of	resonance	
structures	are	provided	by	the	carbonate ion 
and the carbon dioxide molecule.

problem 4.3 Fig. 4.5 Resonance in CO2 molecule, I, II 
and III represent the three canonical 

Explain	 the	 structure	 of	 CO2–
3  ion in forms.

terms of resonance.
Solution in general, it may be stated that 
The	 single	 Lewis	 structure	 based	 on	 •	 Resonance	stabilizes	the	molecule	as	the	
the presence of two single bonds and energy of the resonance hybrid is less 
one double bond between carbon than the energy of any single cannonical 
and	 oxygen	 atoms	 is	 inadequate	 to	 structure; and,
represent the molecule accurately as it 
represents unequal bonds. According •	 Re s onanc e 	 a v e r a g e s 	 t h e 	 b ond	
to	the	experimental	findings,	all	carbon	 characteristics as a whole.
to	oxygen	bonds	in	CO2–

3 	are	equivalent.	 	 Thus	 the	 energy	 of	 the	 O3 resonance 
Therefore	 the	 carbonate	 ion	 is	 best	 hybrid is lower than either of the two 
described as a resonance hybrid of the cannonical	froms	I	and	II	(Fig.	4.3).
canonical forms I, II, and III shown below.

Many misconceptions are associated 
with resonance and the same need to be 
dispelled. You should remember that :
•	 The	 cannonical	 forms	 have	 no	 real	

existence.
•	 The	molecule	does	not	exist	for	a	certain	

fraction of time in one cannonical form 
and for other fractions of time in other 

Fig. 4.4 Resonance in CO 2–
3 , I, II and III cannonical forms.

represent the three canonical •	 There	is	no	such		equilibrium	between	
forms. the	 cannonical	 forms	 as	 we	 have	

problem 4.4  between	 tautomeric	 forms	 (keto and 
Explain	the	structure	of	CO2 molecule. enol)	in	tautomerism.

•	 The	molecule	 as	 such	 has	 a	 single	
Solution structure which is the resonance 
The	experimentally	determined	carbon	 hybrid of the cannonical forms and 
to	 oxygen	 bond	 length	 in	 CO2 is  which cannot as such be depicted by 
115	 pm.	 The	 lengths	 of	 a	 normal	 a	single	Lewis	structure.
carbon	 to	 oxygen	 double	 bond	 (C=O)	
and	carbon	to	oxygen	triple	bond	(C≡O)	 4.3.6 polarity of Bonds 
are	121	pm	and	110	pm	 respectively.	
The	 carbon-oxygen	 bond	 lengths	 in	 The	existence	of	a	hundred	percent	ionic	or	
CO covalent	bond	represents	an	ideal	situation.	

2	 (115	 pm)	 lie	 between	 the	 values	
for C=O and C≡O.	Obviously,	 a	 single	 In reality no bond or a compound is either 
Lewis	 structure	 cannot	 depict	 this	 completely	covalent	or	ionic.	Even	in	case	of	
position and it becomes necessary to covalent	bond	between	two	hydrogen	atoms,	
write	more	 than	 one	 Lewis	 structures	 there is some ionic character.
and to consider that the structure of 
CO2 is best described as a hybrid of When	 covalent	 bond	 is	 formed	between	
the canonical or resonance forms I, II  two	 similar	 atoms,	 for	 example	 in	H2, O2, 
and III. Cl2,	N2 or F2, the shared pair of electrons is 

equally attracted by the two atoms. As a result 

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   110 9/12/2022   9:36:12 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 111

electron	pair	is	situated	exactly	between	the	 In case of polyatomic molecules the dipole 
two	identical	nuclei.	The	bond	so	formed	is	 moment	not	only	depend	upon	the	individual	
called	nonpolar	 covalent	bond.	Contrary	 to	 dipole moments of bonds known as bond 
this in case of a heteronuclear molecule like dipoles but also on the spatial arrangement 
HF,	the	shared	electron	pair	between	the	two	 of	 various	 bonds	 in	 the	molecule.	 In	 such	
atoms	gets	displaced	more	towards	fluorine	 case, the dipole moment of a molecule is the 
since	the	electronegativity	of	fluorine	(Unit	3) vector	sum	of	the	dipole	moments	of	various	
is	 far	 greater	 than	 that	 of	 hydrogen.	 The	 bonds.	For	example	in	H2O molecule, which 
resultant	 covalent	bond	 is	a	polar	 covalent	 has	a	bent	structure,	the	two	O–H	bonds	are	
bond. oriented	 at	 an	 angle	 of	 104.50.	 Net	 dipole	

As a result of polarisation, the molecule moment	of	6.17	×	10–30	C	m	(1D	=	3.33564	
possesses the dipole moment	 (depicted	 ×	 10–30	 C	m)	 is	 the	 resultant	 of	 the	 dipole	
below)	which	can	be	defined	as	the	product	of	 moments	of	two	O–H	bonds.
the magnitude of the charge and the distance 
between	the	centres	of	positive	and	negative	
charge. It is usually designated by a Greek 
letter	 ‘µ’.	Mathematically,	 it	 is	expressed	as	
follows :
Dipole	moment	(µ)	=	charge	(Q)	×	distance	of	
																																																separation	(r)

Dipole	moment	 is	 usually	 expressed	 in	 Net	Dipole	moment,	µ 	=	1.85	D	
Debye	units	(D).	The	conversion	factor	is =	1.85	×	3.33564	×	10–30	C	m	=	6.17	×10–30 C m

	 1	D	=	3.33564	×	10–30  C m
where C is coulomb and m is meter. The	dipole	moment	in	case	of	BeF2	is	zero.	

This	is	because	the	two	equal	bond	dipoles	
Further	dipole	moment	is	a	vector	quantity	 point in opposite directions and cancel the 

and	by	convention	it	is	depicted	by	a	small	 effect of each other.
arrow	with	 tail	 on	 the	 negative	 centre	 and	
head	 pointing	 towards	 the	 positive	 centre.	
But	in	chemistry	presence	of	dipole	moment	
is	 represented	 by	 the	 crossed	 arrow	 ( )	
put	on	Lewis	structure	of	the	molecule.	The	 In	tetra-atomic	molecule,	for	example	in	
cross	is	on	positive	end	and	arrow	head	is	on	 BF3,	the	dipole	moment	is	zero	although	the	 
negative	end.	For	example	the	dipole	moment	 B	–	F	bonds	are	oriented	at	an	angle	of	120o 
of	HF	may	be	represented	as	: to	one	another,	the	three	bond	moments	give	

H									F	 a	net	sum	of	zero	as	the	resultant	of	any	two	
is equal and opposite to the third.

This	arrow	symbolises	the	direction	of	the	
shift	of	electron	density	in	the	molecule.	Note	
that the direction of crossed arrow is opposite 
to	the	conventional	direction	of	dipole	moment	
vector.	

Peter Debye, the Dutch chemist 
received Nobel prize in 1936 for 
his work on X-ray diffraction and Let	us	study	an	 interesting	case	of	NH3 
dipole moments. The magnitude and	NF3	molecule.	Both	the	molecules	have	
of the dipole moment is given in pyramidal shape with a lone pair of electrons 
Debye units in order to honour him. on	nitrogen	atom.	Although	fluorine	is	more	

electronegative	than	nitrogen,	the	resultant	

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   111 9/12/2022   9:36:12 AM



112 chemistry

dipole	moment	of	NH3	(4.90	×	10
–30	C	m)	is	 •	 The	smaller	the	size	of	the	cation	and	the	

greater	than	that	of	NF3	(0.8	×	10
–30	C	m).	This	 larger	 the	 size	 of	 the	anion,	 the	 greater	

is	because,	in	case	of	NH3 the orbital dipole the	covalent	character	of	an	ionic	bond.
due to lone pair is in the same direction as •	 The	greater	 the	charge	on	 the	cation,	 the	
the	 resultant	 dipole	moment	 of	 the	N	 –	H	 greater	 the	covalent	character	of	 the	 ionic	
bonds,	whereas	in	NF3 the orbital dipole is in bond.
the direction opposite to the resultant dipole 
moment	of	the	three	N–F	bonds.	The	orbital	 •	 For	cations	of	the	same	size	and	charge,	
dipole because of lone pair decreases the effect the one, with electronic configuration 
of	the	resultant	N	–	F	bond	moments,	which	 (n-1)dnnso, typical of transition metals, is 
results	 in	the	 low	dipole	moment	of	NF more polarising than the one with a noble 

3 as 
represented below : gas	configuration,	ns2 np6, typical of alkali 

and alkaline earth metal cations.
	 The	 cation	 polarises	 the	 anion,	 pulling	

the electronic charge toward itself and 
thereby increasing the electronic charge 
between	 the	 two.	This	 is	precisely	what	
happens	in	a	covalent	bond,	i.e.,	buildup	
of electron charge density between the 
nuclei.	The	polarising	power	of	the	cation,	
the polarisability of the anion and the 
extent	of	distortion	(polarisation)	of	anion	
are the factors, which determine the per 

Dipole moments of some molecules are cent	covalent	character	of	the	ionic bond. 
shown	in	Table	4.5.

Just as all the covalent bonds have 4.4 tHE vALEnCE SHELL ELECtROn 
some partial ionic character, the ionic pAiR REpULSiOn (vSEpR) tHEORy
bonds also have partial covalent character. As already explained,	Lewis	concept	is	unable	
the partial covalent character of ionic to	 explain	 the	 shapes	 of	molecules.	 This	
bonds was discussed by Fajans in terms of theory	provides	a	simple	procedure	to	predict	
the following rules: the	shapes	of	covalent molecules.	Sidgwick	 

table 4.5  Dipole Moments of Selected Molecules

type of Molecule Example Dipole  
Moment, µ(D) Geometry

Molecule (AB) HF 1.78 linear
HCl 1.07 linear
HBr 0.79 linear
Hl 0.38 linear
H2 0 linear

Molecule (AB2) H2O 1.85 bent
H2S 0.95 bent
CO2 0 linear

Molecule (AB3) NH3 1.47 trigonal-pyramidal
NF3 0.23 trigonal-pyramidal
BF3 0 trigonal-planar

Molecule (AB4) CH4 0 tetrahedral
CHCl3 1.04 tetrahedral
CCl4 0 tetrahedral

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   112 9/12/2022   9:36:12 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 113

and	Powell	in	1940,	proposed	a	simple	theory	 result	in	deviations	from	idealised	shapes	and	
based	 on	 the	 repulsive	 interactions	 of	 the	 alterations in bond angles in molecules.
electron	 pairs	 in	 the	 valence	 shell	 of	 the	 For the prediction of geometrical shapes 
atoms.	It	was	further	developed	and	redefined	 of	molecules	with	the	help	of	VSEPR	theory,	
by	Nyholm	and	Gillespie	(1957).	 it	 is	 convenient	 to	 divide	molecules	 into	
the main postulates of vSEpR theory are two categories as (i) molecules in which 
as follows: the central atom has no lone pair and 
•	 The	 shape	 of	 a	molecule	 depends	upon	 (ii) molecules in which the central atom 

the	number	of	valence	shell	electron	pairs	 has one or more lone pairs. 
(bonded	or	nonbonded)	around	the	central	 Tab le 	 4 .6 	 (page114 ) 	 shows 	 the	
atom. arrangement of electron pairs about a 

•	 Pairs	of	electrons	in	the	valence	shell	repel	 central	atom	A	(without	any	lone	pairs)	and 
one another since their electron clouds are geometries of some molecules/ions of the type 
negatively	charged. AB.	Table	4.7	(page	115)	shows	shapes	of	some	

•	 These	pairs	 of	 electrons	 tend	 to	 occupy	 simple molecules and ions in which the central 
such positions in space that minimise atom	has	one	or	more	lone	pairs.	Table	4.8 
repulsion	 and	 thus	maximise	 distance	 (page	 116)	 explains	 the	 reasons	 for	 the	
between them. distortions in the geometry of the molecule.

•	 The	 valence	 shell	 is	 taken	 as	 a	 sphere	 As	 depicted	 in	 Table	 4.6, 	 in	 the	
with the electron pairs localising on the compounds	of	AB2,	AB3,	AB4,	AB5	and	AB6, 
spherical	 surface	 at	maximum	distance	 the arrangement of electron pairs and the 
from one another. B	 atoms	 around	 the	 central	 atom	A	 are	 : 

linear, trigonal planar, tetrahedral, 
•	 A multiple bond is treated as if it is a single trigonal-bipyramidal and octahedral, 

electron pair and the two or three electron respectively.	Such	arrangement	can	be	seen	
pairs of a multiple bond are treated as a in	the	molecules	like	BF3	(ABsingle super pair. 3),	CH4	(AB4)	and	

PCl5	(AB5)	as	depicted	below	by	their	ball	and 
•	 Where two or more resonance structures stick models. 

can	 represent	 a	molecule,	 the	 VSEPR	
model is applicable to any such structure.

the repulsive interaction of electron pairs 
decrease in the order:
Lone	 pair	 (lp)	 –	 Lone	 pair	 (lp)	 >	 Lone	 pair	
(lp)	 –	 Bond	 pair	 (bp)	 >	 Bond	 pair	 (bp)	 –	 
Bond	pair	(bp)	 Fig. 4.6 The shapes of molecules in which 

central atom has no lone pair
Nyholm	and	Gillespie	 (1957)	refined	the	

VSEPR	model	 by	 explaining	 the	 important	 The	 VSEPR	 Theory	 is	 able	 to	 predict	
difference between the lone pairs and bonding geometry of a large number of molecules, 
pairs of electrons. While the lone pairs are especially the compounds of p-block	elements	
localised on the central atom, each bonded accurately. It is also quite successful in 
pair is shared between two atoms. As a result, determining	 the	 geometry	 quite-accurately	
the lone pair electrons in a molecule occupy even	when	 the	 energy	 difference	 between	
more space as compared to the bonding pairs possible	 structures	 is	 very	 small.	 The	
of	electrons.	This	results	in	greater	repulsion	 theoretical	basis	of	the	VSEPR	theory	regarding	
between lone pairs of electrons as compared the effects of electron pair repulsions on 
to	the	lone	pair	-	bond	pair	and	bond	pair	-	 molecular shapes is not clear and continues 
bond pair repulsions.	These	repulsion	effects	 to be a subject of doubt and discussion.

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   113 9/12/2022   9:36:12 AM



114 chemistry

table 4.6 Geometry of Molecules in which the Central Atom has no Lone pair of Electrons

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   114 9/12/2022   9:36:13 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 115

table 4.7 Shape (geometry) of Some Simple Molecules/ions with Central ions having 
One or More Lone pairs of Electrons(E).

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   115 9/12/2022   9:36:13 AM



116 chemistry

table 4.8  Shapes of Molecules containing Bond pair and Lone pair
Molecule no. of no. of Arrangement Shape Reason for the 

type bonding lone of electrons shape acquired
pairs pairs

AB2E 4 1 Bent Theoretically	 the	 shape	
should	have	been	triangular	
planar but actually it is found 
to	be	bent	or	v-shaped.	The	
reason	 being	 the	 lone	 pair-
bond pair repulsion is much 
more as compared to the bond 
pair-bond	pair	repulsion.	So	
the angle is reduced to 119.5° 
from 120°.

AB3E 3 1 Trigonal Had	there	been	a	bp	in	place	
pyramidal of	 lp	 the	shape	would	have	

been tetrahedral but one 
lone pair is present and due 
to the repulsion between 
lp-bp	 (which	 is	more	 than	
bp-bp	 repulsion)	 the	 angle	
between bond pairs is 
reduced	to	107°	from	109.5°.

Bent The	shape	should	have	been	
AB2E2 2 2 tetrahedral if there were all bp 

but two lp are present so the 
shape is distorted tetrahedral 
or	 angular.	 The	 reason	 is	 
lp-lp	repulsion	is	more	than	
lp-bp	repulsion	which	is	more	
than	bp-bp	repulsion.	Thus,	
the	angle	is	reduced	to	104.5°	
from 109.5°.

AB4E 4 1 See- In	(a)	the	lp	is	present	at	axial	
saw position so there are three 

lp—bp repulsions at 90°. 
In(b)	the	lp	is	in	an	equatorial	
position, and there are two 
lp—bp	 repulsions.	 Hence,	
arrangement	 (b)	 is	 more	
stable.	 The	 shape	 shown	 in	
(b)	is	described	as	a	distorted	
tetrahedron, a folded square 

(More	stable) or	a	see-saw.

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   116 9/12/2022   9:36:13 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 117

Molecule no. of no. of Arrangement Shape Reason for the 
type bonding lone of electrons shape acquired

pairs pairs

AB3E2 3 2 T-shape In	 (a)	 the	 lp	 are	 at	
equatorial position 
so	 there	 are	 less	 lp-
bp repuls ions as 
compared to others 
in which the lp are 
at	axial	positions.	So	
structure	 (a)	 is	most	
stable.	(T-shaped).	

4.5 vALEnCE BOnD tHEORy of	 the	valence	bond	 theory	 is	based	on	 the	
As	we	 know	 that	 Lewis	 approach	 helps	 in	 knowledge of atomic orbitals, electronic 
writing the structure of molecules but it configurations	 of	 elements	 (Units	 2),	 the	
fails	 to	 explain	 the	 formation	 of	 chemical	 overlap	 criteria	 of	 atomic	 orbitals,	 the	
bond.	It	also	does	not	give	any	reason	for	the	 hybridization	 of	 atomic	 orbitals	 and	 the	
difference in bond dissociation enthalpies and principles	of	variation	and	superposition.	A	
bond	lengths	in	molecules	like	H rigorous	treatment	of	the	VB	theory	in	terms	

2	(435.8	kJ	
mol-1,	74	pm)	and	F2	(155	kJ	mol-1,	144	pm),	 of these aspects is beyond the scope of this 
although	in	both	the	cases	a	single	covalent	 book.	Therefore,	for	the	sake	of	convenience,	

valence	bond	theory	has	been	discussed	 in	
bond is formed by the sharing of an electron terms	 of	 qualitative	 and	non-mathematical	
pair	 between	 the	 respective	 atoms.	 It	 also	 treatment	only.	To	start	with,	let	us	consider	
gives	no	idea	about	the	shapes	of	polyatomic	 the formation of hydrogen molecule which is 
molecules. the simplest of all molecules.

Similarly	 the	 VSEPR	 theory	 gives	 the	 Consider	 two	hydrogen	 atoms	A	 and	B	
geometry of simple molecules but theoretically, approaching	 each	 other	 having	 nuclei	 NA 
it	does	not	explain	them	and	also	it	has	limited	 and	NB and electrons present in them are 
applications.	To	overcome	 these	 limitations	 represented by eA and eB. When the two atoms 
the two important theories based on quantum are at large distance from each other, there 
mechanical	principles	are	introduced.	These	 is no interaction between them. As these two 
are	valence	bond	(VB)	theory	and	molecular	 atoms	approach	 each	 other,	 new	attractive	
orbital	(MO)	theory. and	repulsive	forces	begin	to	operate.

valence bond theory was introduced Attractive	forces	arise	between:
by	Heitler	and	London	(1927)	and	developed	 (i)	 nucleus	of	one	atom	and	its	own	electron	
further	by	Pauling	and	others.	A	discussion	 that	is	NA – eA	and	NB– eB.

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   117 9/12/2022   9:36:13 AM



118 chemistry

(ii)	 nucleus	 of	 one	 atom	 and	 electron	 of	 together	to	form	a	stable	molecule	having	the	
other	atom	i.e.,	NA– eB,	NB– eA. bond	length	of	74	pm.	

Similarly	repulsive	forces	arise	between	 Since	the	energy	gets	released	when	the	
(i)	 electrons	of	two	atoms	like	eA – eB, bond is formed between two hydrogen atoms, 
(ii)	 nuclei	of	two	atoms	NA	–	NB.

the hydrogen molecule is more stable than 
that	of	isolated	hydrogen	atoms.	The	energy	

Attractive	 forces	 tend	 to	 bring	 the	 two	 so released is called as bond enthalpy, which 
atoms	close	to	each	other	whereas	repulsive	 is	 corresponding	 to	minimum	 in	 the	 curve	
forces	tend	to	push	them	apart	(Fig.	4.7).	 depicted	in	Fig.	4.8.	Conversely,	435.8	kJ	of	

energy is required to dissociate one mole of 
H2 molecule.

H2(g)	+	435.8	kJ	mol–1 →	H(g)	+	H(g)

Fig. 4.8  The potential energy curve for the 
formation of H2 molecule as a function 
of internuclear distance of the H atoms. 
The minimum in the curve corresponds 
to the most stable state of H2.  

4.5.1 Orbital Overlap Concept 
In the formation of hydrogen molecule, 
there is a minimum energy state when two 
hydrogen atoms are so near that their atomic 

Fig. 4.7 Forces of attraction and repulsion orbitals	undergo	partial	interpenetration.	This	
during the formation of H2 molecule partial merging of atomic orbitals is called 

overlapping	of	atomic	orbitals	which	results	in	
Experimentally	 it	 has	 been	 found	 that	 the	pairing	of	electrons.	The	extent	of	overlap	

the	magnitude	 of	 new	 attractive	 force	 is	
more	 than	 the	 new	 repulsive	 forces.	 As	 a	 decides	 the	strength	of	a	covalent	bond.	 In	
result, two atoms approach each other and general,	greater	the	overlap	the	stronger	is	the	
potential energy decreases. Ultimately a stage bond	formed	between	two	atoms.	Therefore,	
is reached where the net force of attraction according	 to	 orbital	 overlap	 concept,	 the	
balances the force of repulsion and system formation	 of	 a	 covalent	 bond	 between	 two	
acquires minimum energy. At this stage atoms results by pairing of electrons present 
two hydrogen atoms are said to be bonded in	the	valence	shell	having	opposite	spins.

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   118 9/12/2022   9:36:13 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 119

4.5.2  Directional properties of Bonds
As	we	have	already	seen,	the	covalent	bond	
is	formed	by	overlapping	of	atomic	orbitals.	
The	molecule	of	hydrogen	is	formed	due	to	the	
overlap	of	1s-orbitals	of	two	H	atoms.

In	case	of	polyatomic	molecules	like	CH4, 
NH3	and	H2O, the geometry of the molecules 
is also important in addition to the bond 
formation.	For	example	why	is	it	so	that	CH4 
molecule	 has	 tetrahedral	 shape	 and	HCH	
bond angles are 109.5°? Why is the shape of 
NH3 molecule pyramidal ?

The	 valence	 bond	 theory	 explains	 the	
shape, the formation and directional properties 
of	bonds	 in	polyatomic	molecules	 like	CH4, 
NH3	 and	H2O,	 etc.	 in	 terms	 of	 overlap	 and	
hybridisation of atomic orbitals.
4.5.3 Overlapping of Atomic Orbitals
When orbitals of two atoms come close to form 
bond,	their	overlap	may	be	positive,	negative	
or	zero	depending	upon	the	sign	(phase)	and	
direction of orientation of amplitude of orbital 
wave	function	in	space	(Fig.	4.9).	Positive	and	
negative	sign	on	boundary	surface	diagrams	
in	the	Fig.	4.9	show	the	sign	(phase)	of	orbital	
wave	function	and	are	not	related	to	charge.	
Orbitals	forming	bond	should	have	same	sign	 Fig.4.9 Positive, negative and zero overlaps of 
(phase)	and	orientation	in	space.	This	is	called	 s and p atomic orbitals 
positive	overlap.	Various	overlaps	of	s and p hydrogen.	The	four	atomic	orbitals	of	carbon,	
orbitals	are	depicted	in	Fig.	4.9. each	with	an	unpaired	electron	can	overlap	

with the 1s	orbitals	of	the	four	H	atoms	which	
The	criterion	of	overlap,	as	the	main	factor	 are	also	singly	occupied.	This	will	result	in	the	

for	 the	 formation	of	covalent	bonds	applies	 formation	of	four	C-H	bonds.	It	will,	however,	
uniformly to the homonuclear/heteronuclear be	observed	that	while	the	three	p	orbitals	of	
diatomic molecules and polyatomic molecules. carbon are at 90°	 to	one	another,	 the	HCH	
We	know	that	the	shapes	of	CH4,	NH3, and angle for these will also be 90°.	That	is	three	
H2O molecules are tetrahedral, pyramidal C-H	 bonds	 will	 be	 oriented	 at	 90° to one 
and	bent	respectively.	It	would	be	therefore	 another.	The	2s orbital of carbon and the 1s 
interesting	to	use	VB	theory	to	find	out	if	these	 orbital	of	H	are	spherically	symmetrical	and	
geometrical	shapes	can	be	explained	in	terms	 they	can	overlap	in	any	direction.	Therefore	
of	the	orbital	overlaps. the	direction	of	the	fourth	C-H	bond	cannot	

Let	us	first	 consider	 the	CH4	 (methane)	 be	ascertained.	This	description	does	not	fit	
molecule.	 The	 electronic	 configuration	 of	 in	with	the	tetrahedral	HCH	angles	of	109.5°. 
carbon	in	its	ground	state	is	[He]2s2 2p2 which Clearly, it follows that simple atomic orbital 
in	the	excited	state	becomes	[He]	2s1 2p 1 2p 1

y  overlap	does	not	account	for	the	directional	
x

2p 1
z .	The	energy	required	for	this	excitation	is	 characteristics	of	bonds	in	CH4. Using similar 

compensated by the release of energy due to procedure and arguments, it can be seen that in 
overlap	between	the	orbitals	of	carbon	and	the	 the	case	of	NH3	and	H2O	molecules,	the	HNH	

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   119 9/12/2022   9:36:14 AM



120 chemistry

and	HOH	 angles	 should	 be	 90°.	 This	 is	 in	 above	 and	 below	 the	 plane	 of	 the	
disagreement with the actual bond angles of participating atoms.
107°	and	104.5°	in	the	NH3	and	H2O molecules 
respectively.
4.5.4 types of Overlapping and nature of 

Covalent Bonds 
The	 covalent	 bond	may	 be	 classified	 into	
two types depending upon the types of 
overlapping:
(i)	Sigma(σ)	bond,	and	(ii)	pi(π)	bond
(i) Sigma(σ) bond :	This	 type	of	covalent	 4.5.5 Strength of Sigma and pi Bonds 

bond	is	formed	by	the	end	to	end	(head- Basically	 the	 strength	 of	 a	 bond	 depends	
on)	overlap	of	bonding	orbitals	along	the	 upon	 the	 extent	 of	 overlapping.	 In	 case	 of	
internuclear	axis.	This	is	called	as	head	 sigma	bond,	the	overlapping	of	orbitals	takes	
on	overlap	or	axial	overlap.	This	can	be	 place	to	a	larger	extent.	Hence,	it	is	stronger	
formed by any one of the following types 
of combinations of atomic orbitals. as	compared	to	the	pi	bond	where	the	extent	

of	 overlapping	 occurs	 to	 a	 smaller	 extent.	
•	 s-s overlapping : In this case, there is Further, it is important to note that in the 

overlap	of	two	half	filled	s-orbitals	along	 formation of multiple bonds between two 
the	internuclear	axis	as	shown	below	: atoms	of	a	molecule,	pi	bond(s)	is	formed	in	

addition to a sigma bond.

4.6 HyBRiDiSAtiOn
In	 order	 to	 explain	 the	 characteristic	
geometrical shapes of polyatomic molecules 

•	 s-p overlapping:	 This	 type	 of	 overlap	 like	CH4,	NH3	and	H2O	etc.,	Pauling	introduced	
occurs	between	half	filled	s-orbitals	of	one	 the concept of hybridisation. According to him 
atom	and	half	filled	p-orbitals	of	another	 the atomic orbitals combine to form new set of 
atom. equivalent	orbitals	known	as	hybrid orbitals. 

Unlike pure orbitals, the hybrid orbitals are 
used	in	bond	formation.	The	phenomenon	is	
known as hybridisation	which	can	be	defined	
as	the	process	of	intermixing	of	the	orbitals	of	

•	 p–p overlapping :	 This	 type	 of	 overlap	 slightly different energies so as to redistribute 
takes	place	between	half	filled	p-orbitals	 their energies, resulting in the formation of 
of the two approaching atoms. new	set	of	orbitals	of	equivalent	energies	and	

shape.	For	example	when	one	2s and three 
2p-orbitals	of	carbon	hybridise,	there	is	the	
formation of four new sp3 hybrid orbitals.
Salient features of hybridisation: The	main	

(ii)	 pi( ) bond : In the formation of π bond features of hybridisation are as under :
the	 atomic	 orbitals	 overlap	 in	 such	 a	
way	 that	 their	axes	 remain	parallel	 to	 1.	 The	number	of	hybrid	orbitals	is	equal	to	
each other and perpendicular to the the number of the atomic orbitals that get 
internuclear	 axis.	 The	 orbitals	 formed	 hybridised.
due	 to	 sidewise	 overlapping	 consists	 2.	 The	 hybridised	 orbitals	 are	 always	
of two saucer type charged clouds equivalent	in	energy	and	shape.

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   120 9/12/2022   9:36:14 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 121

3.	 The	hybrid	orbitals	are	more	effective	in	 vacant	2p	orbital	to	account	for	its	bivalency.	
forming stable bonds than the pure atomic One 2s and one 2p-orbital	gets	hybridised	to	
orbitals. form two sp	 hybridised	 orbitals.	 These	 two	 

4.	 These	 hybrid	 orbitals	 are	 directed	 in	 sp hybrid orbitals are oriented in opposite 
space	in	some	preferred	direction	to	have	 direction	forming	an	angle	of	180°.	Each	of	 
minimum repulsion between electron the sp	 hybridised	 orbital	 overlaps	with	 the	 
pairs and thus a stable arrangement. 2p-orbital	of	chlorine	axially	and	form	two	Be-
Therefore,	 the	 type	 of	 hybridisation	 Cl	sigma	bonds.	This	is	shown	in	Fig.	4.10.
indicates the geometry of the molecules.

important conditions for hybridisation 
(i)	 The	orbitals	present	in	the	valence	shell	

of the atom are hybridised.
(ii)	 The	 orbitals	 undergoing	 hybridisation	 Be

should	have	almost	equal	energy.
(iii)	 Promotion	 of	 electron	 is	 not	 essential	

condition prior to hybridisation.
(iv)	 It	is	not	necessary	that	only	half	filled	

orbitals participate in hybridisation. 
In	 some	 cases,	 even	 filled	 orbitals	 of	
valence	shell	take	part	in	hybridisation.

Fig.4.10 (a) Formation of  sp hybrids from s and 
4.6.1  types of Hybridisation p orbitals;  (b) Formation of the linear 
There	 are	 various	 types	 of	 hybridisation	 BeCl2 molecule
involving	s, p and d	 orbitals.	 The	 different	
types of hybridisation are as under: (ii) sp2 hybridisation : In this hybridisation 

there	 is	 involvement	 of	 one	 s and two 
(i) sp hybridisation:	This	type	of	hybridisation	 p-orbitals	 in	order	 to	 form	three	equivalent	
involves	the	mixing	of	one	s and one p orbital sp2	 hybridised	 orbitals.	 For	 example,	 in	
resulting	in	the	formation	of	two	equivalent	 BCl3 molecule, the ground state electronic 
sp	hybrid	orbitals.	The	suitable	orbitals	 for	 configuration of central boron atom is 
sp hybridisation are s and pz, if the hybrid 1s22s22p1.	In	the	excited	state,	one	of	the	2s 
orbitals	are	to	lie	along	the	z-axis.	Each	sp electrons	is	promoted	to	vacant	2p orbital as 
hybrid orbitals has 50% s-character	 and	
50% p-character.	Such	a	molecule	in	which	
the central atom is sp-hybridised	and	linked	
directly to two other central atoms possesses 
linear	geometry.	This	type	of	hybridisation	is	
also known as diagonal hybridisation.

The	two	sp hybrids point in the opposite 
direction	 along	 the	 z-axis	 with	 projecting	
positive	lobes	and	very	small	negative	lobes,	
which	 provides	more	 effective	 overlapping	
resulting in the formation of stronger bonds. 
Example of molecule having sp 
hybridisation 
BeCl 2: 	 The	 ground	 state	 e lectronic	
configuration	 of	Be	 is	 1s22s2.	 In	 the	 exited	 Fig.4.11 Formation of sp2 hybrids and the BCl3 
state one of the 2s-electrons	is	promoted	to	 molecule

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   121 9/12/2022   9:36:15 AM



122 chemistry

a result boron has three unpaired electrons. 
These	 three	 orbitals	 (one	 2s and two 2p)	 ground state is 2S22p1

x 2p1
y 2p1

z 	having	three	
hybridise to form three sp2 hybrid orbitals. unpaired electrons in the sp3 hybrid orbitals 
The	 three	 hybrid	 orbitals	 so	 formed	 are	 and a lone pair of electrons is present in the 
oriented in a trigonal planar arrangement fourth	one.	These	three	hybrid	orbitals	overlap	
and	 overlap	with	 2p orbitals of chlorine to with 1s orbitals of hydrogen atoms to form 
form	 three	B-Cl	 bonds.	 Therefore,	 in	BCl three	N–H	sigma	bonds.	We	know	 that	 the	

3	 
(Fig.	 4.11),	 the	 geometry	 is	 trigonal	 planar	 force of repulsion between a lone pair and a 
with	ClBCl	bond	angle	of	120°. bond pair is more than the force of repulsion 

between	 two	 bond	 pairs	 of	 electrons.	 The	
(iii) sp3 hybridisation:	 This	 type	 of	 molecule thus gets distorted and the bond 
hybridisation	can	be	explained	by	taking	the	 angle	 is	 reduced	 to	 107°	 from	109.5°.	 The	
example	 of	CH4 molecule in which there is geometry of such a molecule will be pyramidal 
mixing	of	one	s-orbital	and	three	p-orbitals	 as	shown	in	Fig.	4.13.
of	the	valence	shell	to	 form	four	sp3 hybrid 
orbital	of	equivalent	energies	and	shape.	There	
is 25% s-character	and	75%	p-character	in	
each sp3	hybrid	orbital.	The	four	sp3 hybrid 
orbitals so formed are directed towards the 
four	 corners	 of	 the	 tetrahedron.	 The	 angle	
between sp3 hybrid orbital is 109.5° as shown 
in	Fig.	4.12.

Fig.4.13  Formation of NH3 molecule

In	case	of	H2O	molecule,	the	four	oxygen	
orbitals	 (one	 2s and three 2p)	 undergo	sp3 
hybridisation forming four sp3 hybrid orbitals 
out of which two contain one electron each and 
the	other	two	contain	a	pair	of	electrons.	These	

σ four sp3 hybrid orbitals acquire a tetrahedral 
geometry, with two corners occupied by 

σ σ hydrogen atoms while the other two by the 
lone	 pairs.	 The	 bond	 angle	 in	 this	 case	 is	

σ reduced	 to	 104.5°	 from	 109.5°	 (Fig.	 4.14)	
and	the	molecule	thus	acquires		a	V-shape	or	 
angular geometry.

Fig.4.12 Formation of sp3 hybrids by the 
combination of s, px , py and pz atomic 
orbitals of carbon and the formation of 
CH4 molecule

The	structure	of	NH3	and	H2O molecules 
can	 also	 be	 explained	with	 the	 help	 of	 sp3 
hybridisation.	In	NH3,	the	valence	shell	(outer)	
electronic	 configuration	 of	 nitrogen	 in	 the	 Fig.4.14 Formation of H2O molecule

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   122 9/12/2022   9:36:16 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 123

4.6.2 Other Examples of sp3, sp2 and sp used for making sp2–s sigma bond with two 
Hybridisation hydrogen	atoms.	The	unhybridised	orbital	(2px 

sp3 Hybridisation in C2H6 molecule: In or 2py)	of	one	carbon	atom	overlaps	sidewise	
ethane molecule both the carbon atoms with the similar orbital of the other carbon 
assume sp3 hybrid state. One of the four atom to form weak π bond, which consists of 
sp3	hybrid	orbitals	of	carbon	atom	overlaps	 two	equal	electron	clouds	distributed	above	
axially	with	similar	orbitals	of	other	atom	to	 and below the plane of carbon and hydrogen 
form sp3-sp3 sigma bond while the other three atoms. 
hybrid orbitals of each carbon atom are used 
in forming sp3–s sigma bonds with hydrogen Thus,	 in	 ethene	molecule,	 the	 carbon-
atoms	 as	 discussed	 in	 section	 4.6.1(iii).	 carbon bond consists of one sp2–sp2 sigma 
Therefore	in	ethane	C–C	bond	length	is	154	 bond	and	one	pi	(π )	bond	between	p orbitals 
pm	and	each	C–H	bond	length	is	109	pm. which are not used in the hybridisation and 
sp2 Hybridisation in C2H4: In the formation are perpendicular to the plane of molecule; the 
of ethene molecule, one of the sp2 hybrid bond	length	134	pm.	The	C–H	bond	is	sp2–s 
orbitals	of	carbon	atom	overlaps	axially	with	 sigma	with	bond	length	108	pm.	The	H–C–H	
sp2 hybridised orbital of another carbon atom bond	angle	is	117.6°	while	the	H–C–C	angle	
to form C–C sigma bond. While the other two is	121°.	The	formation	of	sigma	and	pi	bonds	
sp2 hybrid orbitals of each carbon atom are in ethene	is	shown	in	Fig.	4.15.

Fig. 4.15 Formation of sigma and pi bonds in ethene

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   123 9/12/2022   9:36:16 AM



124 chemistry

sp Hybridisation  in C2H2 : In the formation 4.6.3 Hybridisation of Elements 
of ethyne molecule, both the carbon atoms involving d Orbitals 
undergo sp-hybridisation	 having	 two	 The	 elements	 present	 in	 the	 third	 period	
unhybridised orbital i.e., 2py and 2px. contain d orbitals in addition to s and p 

One sp hybrid orbital of one carbon atom orbitals.	 The	 energy	 of	 the	 3d orbitals are 
overlaps	axially	with	sp hybrid orbital of the comparable	 to	 the	energy	of	 the	3s	and	3p 

orbitals.	 The	 energy	 of	 3d orbitals are also 
other carbon atom to form C–C sigma bond, comparable	 to	 those	of	4s	 and	4p orbitals. 
while the other hybridised orbital of each As	a	consequence	the	hybridisation	involving	
carbon	 atom	 overlaps	 axially	with	 the	 half	 either	 3s,	 3p	 and	 3d	 or	 3d,	 4s	 and	 4p is 
filled	 s orbital of hydrogen atoms forming possible.	 However,	 since	 the	 difference	 in	
σ	 bonds.	 Each	 of	 the	 two	 unhybridised	 p energies	of	3p	and	4s	orbitals	is	significant,	no	
orbitals	 of	 both	 the	 carbon	 atoms	 overlaps	 hybridisation	involving	3p,	3d	and	4s orbitals 
sidewise to form two π bonds between the is possible.
carbon	atoms.	So	the	triple	bond	between	the	 The	 important	 hybridisation	 schemes	
two carbon atoms is made up of one sigma involving	s, p and d orbitals are summarised 
and two pi bonds as shown in Fig.	4.16. below:

Shape of 
molecules/ Hybridisation Atomic 

ions type orbitals Examples

Square	 dsp2 d+s+p(2) [Ni(CN) 2–
4] , 

planar [Pt(Cl)4]
2–

Trigonal	 sp3d s+p(3)+d PF5,	PCl5
bipyramidal
Square	 sp3d2 s+p(3)+d(2) BrF5
pyramidal
Octahedral sp3d2 s+p(3)+d(2)	 SF6, [CrF 3–

6]
d2sp3 d(2)+s+p(3) [Co(NH 3+

3)6]

(i) Formation of PCl5 (sp3d hybridisation): 
The	ground	state	and	the	excited	state	outer	
electronic configurations of phosphorus 
(Z=15)	are	represented	below.	

Fig.4.16 Formation of sigma and pi bonds in sp3d hybrid orbitals filled by electron pairs 
ethyne donated by five Cl atoms.

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   124 9/12/2022   9:36:16 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 125

Now	 the	 five	 orbitals	 (i.e., one s, three six	sp3d2	hybrid	orbitals	overlap	with	singly	
p and one d	 orbitals)	 are	 available	 for	 occupied	orbitals	 of	fluorine	atoms	 to	 form	
hybridisation	to	yield	a	set	of	five	sp3d hybrid six	S–F	sigma	bonds.	Thus	SF6 molecule has 
orbitals	which	are	directed	towards	the	five	 a regular octahedral geometry as shown in 
corners of a trigonal bipyramidal as depicted Fig.	4.18.
in	the	Fig.	4.17.

sp3d2 hybridisation

Fig. 4.17 Trigonal bipyramidal geometry of PCl5 
molecule

It should be noted that all the bond angles 
in trigonal bipyramidal geometry are not 
equivalent.	 In	 PCl5	 the	 five	sp3d orbitals of 
phosphorus	overlap	with	the	singly	occupied	
p	orbitals	of	chlorine	atoms	to	form	five	P–Cl	
sigma	 bonds.	 Three	 P–Cl	 bond	 lie	 in	 one	
plane and make an angle of 120° with each 
other; these bonds are termed as equatorial 
bonds.	 The	 remaining	 two	 P–Cl	 bonds–one	 Fig. 4.18 Octahedral geometry of SF6 molecule
lying	 above	 and	 the	 other	 lying	 below	 the	
equatorial plane, make an angle of 90° with 4.7 MOLECULAR ORBitAL tHEORy 
the	plane.	These	bonds	are	called	axial	bonds.	 Molecular	orbital	(MO)	theory	was	developed	
As	the	axial	bond	pairs	suffer	more	repulsive	 by	F.	Hund	and	R.S.	Mulliken	in	1932.	The	
interaction from the equatorial bond pairs, salient features of this theory are :
therefore	 axial	 bonds	 have	 been	 found	 to	 (i)	 The	electrons	in	a	molecule	are	present	
be slightly longer and hence slightly weaker in	the	various	molecular	orbitals	as	the	
than	the	equatorial	bonds;	which	makes	PCl5 electrons of atoms are present in the 
molecule	more	reactive. various	atomic	orbitals.
(ii) Formation of SF6 (sp3d2 hybridisation): 
In	 SF6 the central sulphur atom has the (ii)	 The	 atomic	 orbitals	 of	 comparable	
ground	 state	 outer	 electronic	 configuration	 energies and proper symmetry combine 
3s23p4.	 In	 the	exited	state	 the	available	six	 to form molecular orbitals.
orbitals i.e., one s, three p and two d are (iii)	 While	an	electron	in	an	atomic	orbital	
singly	occupied	by	electrons.	These	orbitals	 is influenced by one nucleus, in a 
hybridise	 to	 form	 six	 new	 sp3d2 hybrid molecular	 orbital	 it	 is	 influenced	 by	
orbitals,	which	are	projected	towards	the	six	 two or more nuclei depending upon the 
corners	of	a	regular	octahedron	in	SF6.	These	 number	of	atoms	in	the	molecule.	Thus,	

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   125 9/12/2022   9:36:17 AM



126 chemistry

an atomic orbital is monocentric while ψA and ψB. Mathematically, the formation of 
a molecular orbital is polycentric. molecular orbitals may be described by the 

(iv)	 The	number	of	molecular	orbital	formed	 linear combination of atomic orbitals that can 
is equal to the number of combining take place by addition and by subtraction of 
atomic orbitals. When two atomic wave	functions	of	individual	atomic	orbitals	
orbitals combine, two molecular orbitals as shown below :
are formed. One is known as bonding ψMO	=	ψA + ψB
molecular orbital while the other is Therefore,	 the	 two	molecular	 orbitals	 
called antibonding molecular orbital. σ and σ* are formed as :

(v)	 The	 bonding	 molecular	 orbital	 has	  σ   =  ψA + ψB
lower energy and hence greater stability 

 σ*	=	 ψA – ψ
than the corresponding antibonding B

molecular orbital. The	molecular	 orbital	σ formed by the 
addition of atomic orbitals is called the bonding 

(vi)	 Just	 as	 the	 electron	 probability	 molecular orbital while the molecular orbital 
distribution around a nucleus in an σ* formed by the subtraction of atomic orbital 
atom	is	given	by	an	atomic	orbital,	the	 is called antibonding molecular orbital as 
electron probability distribution around depicted	in	Fig.	4.19.
a	group	of	nuclei	in	a	molecule	is	given	
by a molecular orbital.

(vii)	 The	 molecular	 orbitals	 like	 atomic	
orbitals are	 filled	 in	 accordance	with	
the aufbau	principle	obeying	the	Pauli’s	
exclusion	principle	and	the	Hund’s	rule.

4.7.1 Formation of Molecular Orbitals 
Linear Combination of Atomic σ*	=	ψA – ψB

Orbitals (LCAO)
According	 to	 wave	mechanics,	 the	 atomic	 ψ ψ
orbitals	can	be	expressed	by	wave	functions	 A B

(ψ ’s)	which	 represent	 the	amplitude	of	 the	 σ  = ψA + ψ
electron	 waves.	 These	 are	 obtained	 from	 B

the	 solution	 of	Schrödinger	wave	 equation.	
However,	 since	 it	 cannot	 be	 solved	 for	 any	
system containing more than one electron, 
molecular orbitals which are one electron 
wave	 functions	 for	molecules	 are	 difficult	 Fig.4.19 Formation of bonding (σ) and antibonding 
to obtain directly from the solution of (σ*) molecular orbitals by the linear 
Schrödinger	 wave	 equation.	 To	 overcome	 combination of atomic orbitals ψA and 
this	problem,	an	approximate	method	known	 ψB centered on two atoms A and B 
as linear combination of atomic orbitals respectively.
(LCAO) has been adopted. Qualitatively,	the	formation	of	molecular	

Let	 us	 apply	 this	 method	 to	 the	 orbitals can be understood in terms of the 
homonuclear diatomic hydrogen molecule. constructive	or	destructive	interference	of	the	
Consider the hydrogen molecule consisting electron	waves	of	the	combining	atoms.	In	the	
of	two	atoms	A	and	B.	Each	hydrogen	atom	 formation of bonding molecular orbital, the 
in the ground state has one electron in 1s two	 electron	waves	 of	 the	 bonding	 atoms	
orbital.	 The	 atomic	 orbitals	 of	 these	 atoms	 reinforce	 each	 other	 due	 to	 constructive	
may	 be	 represented	 by	 the	wave	 functions	 interference while in the formation of 

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   126 9/12/2022   9:36:17 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 127

antibonding molecular orbital, the electron as	the	molecular	axis.	It	is	important	to	note	
waves	cancel	each	other	due	to	destructive	 that	 atomic	 orbitals	having	 same	or	nearly	
interference. As a result, the electron density in the same energy will not combine if they do 
a bonding molecular orbital is located between not	have	the	same	symmetry.	For	example,	
the nuclei of the bonded atoms because of 2pz orbital of one atom can combine with 2pz 
which	the	repulsion	between	the	nuclei	is	very	 orbital of the other atom but not with the 
less while in case of an antibonding molecular 2px or 2py orbitals because of their different 
orbital, most of the electron density is located symmetries. 
away from the space between the nuclei. 3. the combining atomic orbitals  must 
Infact,	there	is	a	nodal	plane	(on	which	the	 overlap to the maximum extent. Greater 
electron	density	 is	zero)	between	the	nuclei	 the	extent	of	overlap,	the	greater	will	be	the	
and hence the repulsion between the nuclei is electron-density	 between	 the	 nuclei	 of	 a	
high.	Electrons	placed	in	a	bonding	molecular	 molecular orbital.
orbital tend to hold the nuclei together and 
stabilise	 a	molecule.	 Therefore,	 a	 bonding	 4.7.3 types of Molecular Orbitals
molecular orbital always possesses lower Molecular orbitals of diatomic molecules are 
energy than either of the atomic orbitals that designated as σ	(sigma),	π	(pi),	δ (delta),	etc.
have	 combined	 to	 form	 it.	 In	 contrast,	 the	 In this nomenclature, the sigma ( ) 
electrons placed in the antibonding molecular molecular orbitals are symmetrical around 
orbital	 destabilise	 the	 molecule.	 This	 is	 the bond-axis while pi ( ) molecular orbitals 
because the mutual repulsion of the electrons are not symmetrical.	For	example,	the	linear	
in this orbital is more than the attraction combination of 1s orbitals centered on two 
between the electrons and the nuclei, which nuclei produces two molecular orbitals which 
causes a net increase in energy. are	symmetrical	around	the	bond-axis.	Such	

It may be noted that the energy of the molecular orbitals are of the σ type and are 
antibonding	 orbital	 is	 raised	 above	 the	 designated as σ1s and σ*1s	[Fig.	4.20(a),	page	
energy of the parent atomic orbitals that 124].	if internuclear axis is taken to be in 
have	combined	and	the	energy	of	the	bonding	 the z-direction, it can be seen that a linear 
orbital has been lowered than the parent combination of 2pz- orbitals of two atoms 
orbitals.	 The	 total	 energy	 of	 two	molecular	 also produces two sigma molecular orbitals 
orbitals,	however,	remains	the	same	as	that	 designated as 2pz and *2pz. [Fig.	4.20(b)]
of two original atomic orbitals. Molecular orbitals obtained from 2px and 
4.7.2 Conditions for the Combination of 2py orbitals are not symmetrical around the 

Atomic Orbitals bond	axis	because	of	the	presence	of	positive	
The	linear	combination	of	atomic	orbitals	to	 lobes	 above	 and	 negative	 lobes	 below	 the	
form molecular orbitals takes place only if the molecular	 plane.	 Such	molecular	 orbitals,	
following	conditions	are	satisfied: are labelled as π and	 =π *	 [Fig.	 4.20(c)].	 A	
1. the combining atomic orbitals must π bonding MO has larger electron density 
have the same or nearly the same energy. above	and	below	the	inter-nuclear	axis.	The	
This	means	that	1s orbital can combine with π* antibonding MO has a node between the 
another 1s orbital but not with 2s orbital nuclei.
because the energy of 2s orbital is appreciably 4.7.4 Energy Level Diagram for Molecular 
higher than that of 1s	orbital.	This	is	not	true	 Orbitals
if	the	atoms	are	very	different. We	have	seen	that	1s atomic orbitals on two 
2. the combining atomic orbitals must atoms form two molecular orbitals designated 
have the same symmetry about the as σ1s and σ*1s. In the same manner, the 2s 
molecular axis.	By	convention	z-axis	is	taken	 and 2p	atomic	orbitals	(eight	atomic	orbitals	

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   127 9/12/2022   9:36:17 AM



128 chemistry

Fig. 4.20 Contours and energies of bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals formed through 
combinations of (a) 1s atomic orbitals; (b) 2pz atomic orbitals and (c) 2px atomic orbitals.

on	two	atoms)	give	rise	to	the	following	eight	 The	 energy	 levels	 of	 these	molecular	 
molecular orbitals: orbitals	have	been	determined	experimentally	
Antibonding MOs σ∗2s σ∗2pz π∗2px π∗2p from spectroscopic data for homonuclear 

y diatomic molecules of second row elements 
Bonding MOs σ2s σ2pz π2px π2py of	the	periodic	table.	The	increasing	order	of	

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   128 9/12/2022   9:36:17 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 129

energies	of	various	molecular orbitals for O2 The	rules	discussed	above	regarding	the	
and F2	is	given	below: stability of the molecule can be restated in 
1s <  ∗1s <  2s <  ∗2s < 2p terms	of	bond	order	as	follows:	A	positive	bond	

z < (π 2px=π 2py) order	(i.e.,	Nb > Na)	means	a	stable	molecule	
< (π ∗2px= π∗ 2py) <  ∗2pz while	 a	 negative	 (i.e.,	 Nb<Na)	 or	 zero	 (i.e.,	 

However,	 this	 sequence	of	 energy	 levels	 Nb =	 Na)	 bond	 order	 means	 an	 unstable	
of molecular orbitals is not correct for the molecule.
remaining	molecules	Li2,	Be2,	B2, C2,	N2. For Nature of the bond  
instance,	it	has	been	observed	experimentally	 Integral	 bond	 order	 values	 of	 1,	 2	 or	 3	
that		for		molecules	such	as	B2, C2,	N2, etc. correspond to single, double or triple bonds 
the	 increasing	 order	 of	 energies	 of	 various	 respectively	 as	 studied	 in	 the	 classical	
molecular orbitals is concept. 
1s <  ∗1s < 2s <  ∗2s  < (π 2 px = π 2 py) Bond-length  
< 2pz < (π ∗2px =π∗2py) <  ∗2pz The	 bond	 order	 between	 two	 atoms	 in	 a	

The	 important	 characteristic	 feature	 molecule	may	 be	 taken	 as	 an	 approximate	
of this order is that the energy of 2p measure	of	the	bond	length.	The	bond	length	

z 
molecular orbital is higher than that decreases as bond order increases.
of 2px and 2py molecular orbitals. Magnetic nature 
4.7.5 Electronic Configuration and If all the molecular orbitals in a molecule are 

Molecular Behaviour doubly occupied, the substance is diamagnetic 
The	distribution	of	electrons	among	various	 (repelled	by	magnetic	field).	However	if	one	or	
molecular orbitals is called the electronic more molecular orbitals are singly occupied it 
configuration of the molecule. From the is	paramagnetic	(attracted	by	magnetic	field),	
electronic	configuration	of	the	molecule,	it	is	 e.g., O2 molecule.
possible to get important information about 4.8 BOnDinG in SOME HOMOnUCLEAR 
the molecule as discussed below. DiAtOMiC MOLECULES
Stability of Molecules: 	If	Nb is the number In this section we shall discuss bonding in 
of electrons occupying  bonding orbitals and some homonuclear diatomic molecules.
Na the number occupying the antibonding 
orbitals, then 1.  Hydrogen molecule (H2 ): It is formed by 

the	combination	of	two	hydrogen	atoms.	Each	
(i)	 the	molecule	 is	 stable	 if	 Nb is greater hydrogen atom has one electron in 1s orbital. 

than	Na, and Therefore,	 in	 all	 there	 are	 two	 electrons	 in	
(ii)	 the	molecule	 is	 unstable	 if	 Nb is less hydrogen molecule which are present in σ1s 

than	N molecular	orbital.	So	electronic	configuration	
a.

of hydrogen molecule is 
In	(i)	more	bonding	orbitals	are	occupied	

and	so	the	bonding	influence	is	stronger	and	a	 H2	:	(σ1s)2
stable	molecule	results.	In	(ii)	the	antibonding	 The	 bond	 order	 of	H2 molecule can be 
influence is stronger and therefore the calculated as given	below:
molecule is unstable. Nb  Na  2  0
Bond order Bond	order	=	 1

2 2
Bond order (b.o.) is defined as one half the This	means	that	the	two	hydrogen	atoms	
difference between the number of electrons are	bonded	together	by	a	single	covalent	bond.	
present in the bonding and the antibonding The	 bond	 dissociation	 energy	 of	 hydrogen	
orbitals i.e., molecule	has	been	found	to	be	438	kJ	mol–1 

Bond	order	(b.o.)	=	½	(Nb–Na)
and	bond	 length	equal	 to	74	pm.	Since	no	

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   129 9/12/2022   9:36:17 AM



130 chemistry

unpaired electron is present in hydrogen vapour	 phase.	 It	 is	 important	 to	 note	 that	
molecule, therefore, it is diamagnetic. double bond in C2 consists of both pi bonds 
2. Helium molecule (He2 ):	 The	 electronic	 because of the presence of four electrons in 
configuration	 of	 helium	 atom	 is	 1s2.	 Each	 two pi molecular orbitals. In most of the other 
helium atom contains 2 electrons, therefore, molecules a double bond is made up of a 
in	He2	molecule	there	would	be	4	electrons.	 sigma bond and a pi bond. In a similar fashion 
These	 electrons	will	 be	 accommodated	 in	 the	bonding	in	N2 molecule can be discussed.
σ1s and σ*1s molecular orbitals leading to 5. Oxygen molecule (O2 ):	 The	 electronic	
electronic	configuration: configuration	of	oxygen	atom	is	1s2 2s2 2p4. 

Each	 oxygen	 atom	has	 8	 electrons,	 hence,	
He  

2 :	(σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2 in O2	molecule	 there	 are	 16	 electrons.	 The	
Bond	order	of	He  

2 is	½(2	–	2)	=	0 electronic configuration of O2 molecule, 
therefore, is

He2 molecule is therefore unstable and 
does not exist. O2 :	 (1s)2	 (	∗1s)2	 ( 2s)2	 (	 ∗ 2s)2 (2pz)

2 

Similarly, it can be shown that Be2 molecule (π2p 2
x   ≡	π2p 2

y )	(π∗2p1
x  ≡	π ∗2p 1

y )(σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2 (σ2s)2 (σ*2s)2 also does not exist.
3. Lithium molecule (Li2 ):	 The	 electronic	
configuration	 of	 lithium	 is	 1s2, 2s1.	 There	 O2 : 
are	 six	 electrons	 in	 Li2.	 The	 electronic	
configuration	of	Li2 molecule, therefore, is From	 the	 electronic	 configuration	 of	O2 

molecule it is clear that ten electrons are 
Li2	:	(σ1s)2	(σ*1s)2 (σ2s)2 present	in	bonding	molecular	orbitals	and	six	
The	 above	 configuration	 is	 also	written	 electrons are present in antibonding molecular 

as	KK(σ2s)2	where	KK	represents	the	closed	 orbitals. Its bond order, therefore, is
K	shell	structure	(σ1s)2	(σ*1s)2.

From	 the	 electronic	 configuration	 of	 Li Bond	order	=	 	[Nb	–	Na]	=	 	[10	–	6]	=2
2 

molecule it is clear that there are four electrons 
present in bonding molecular orbitals and two So	 in	 oxygen	molecule,	 atoms	 are	 held 
electrons present in antibonding molecular by	a	double	bond.	Moreover,	it	may	be	noted	
orbitals.	Its	bond	order,	therefore,	is	½	(4	–	 that it contains two unpaired electrons in 
2)	=	1.	 It	means	that	Li2 molecule is stable π ∗2px and π ∗2py molecular  orbitals, therefore, 
and since it has no unpaired electrons it O2 molecule should be paramagnetic, 
should be diamagnetic.  Indeed diamagnetic a prediction that corresponds to 
Li2	 molecules	 are	 known	 to	 exist	 in	 the	 experimental observation. In this way, the 
vapour	phase. theory	successfully	explains	the	paramagnetic	

nature	of	oxygen.	
4. Carbon molecule (C2 ): The	 electronic	
configuration	of	carbon	is	1s2 2s2 2p2.	There	 Similarly,	 the	 electronic	 configurations	

of other homonuclear diatomic molecules of [ ]
are	 twelve	 electrons	 in	 C2.	 The	 electronic	
configuration	of	C2 molecule, therefore, is the second row of the periodic table can be 

written.	In	Fig.	4.21	are	given	the	molecular	
C2 :	(1s)2	(	∗1s)2	(	∗ 2s)2	(π2p2

x  =	π2p2
y) orbital occupancy and molecular properties 

for	B2	through	Ne2.	The	sequence	of	MOs	and	
or KK (2s)2	(	∗ 2s)2	(π2p2

x  =	π2p2
y) their	electron	population	are	shown.	The	bond	

The	 bond	 order	 of	 C2	 is	½	 (8	 –	 4)	 =	 2	 energy, bond length, bond order, magnetic 
and C2 should be diamagnetic. Diamagnetic properties	and	valence	electron	configuration	
C2	molecules	have	 indeed	been	detected	 in	 appear below the orbital diagrams.

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   130 9/12/2022   9:36:18 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 131

Fig. 4.21 MO occupancy and molecular properties for B2 through Ne2.

4.9 HyDROGEn BOnDinG Hydrogen	bond is represented by a dotted 
Nitrogen,	oxygen	and	fluorine	are	the	highly	 line	 (–	–	–)	while	a	solid	 line	represents	the	
electronegative	 elements.	When	 they	 are	 covalent	bond.	thus, hydrogen bond can be 
attached	to	a	hydrogen	atom	to	form	covalent	 defined as the attractive force which binds 
bond,	the	electrons	of	the	covalent	bond	are	 hydrogen atom of one molecule with the 
shifted	 towards	 the	more	 electronegative	 electronegative atom (F, O or n) of another 
atom.	 This	 partially	 positively	 charged	 molecule.
hydrogen atom forms a bond with the other 4.9.1 Cause of Formation of Hydrogen 
more	 electronegative	 atom.	 This	 bond	 is	

[ ] Bond 
known as hydrogen bond and is weaker 
than	the	covalent	bond.	For	example,	in	HF	 When hydrogen is bonded to strongly 
molecule,	the	hydrogen	bond	exists	between	 electronegative	element	‘X’,	the	electron	pair	
hydrogen	atom	of	one	molecule	and	fluorine	 shared	 between	 the	 two	 atoms	moves	 far	
atom of another molecule as depicted below : away from hydrogen atom. As a result the 

hydrogen	atom	becomes	highly	electropositive	
–	–	–	Hδ+–Fδ–	–	–	–Hδ+ – Fδ–	–	–	–	Hδ+ – Fδ–

with	 respect	 to	 the	 other	 atom	 ‘X’.	 Since	
Here,	hydrogen	bond	acts	as	a	bridge	between	 there is displacement of electrons towards 
two	atoms	which	holds	one	atom	by	covalent	 X,	the	hydrogen	acquires	fractional	positive	
bond and the other by hydrogen bond. charge	(δ +)	while	‘X’	attain	fractional	negative	

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   131 9/12/2022   9:36:18 AM



132 chemistry

charge	(δ–).	This	results	in	the	formation	of	a	 H-bond	 in	 case	 of	HF	molecule,	 alcohol	 or	
polar	molecule	having	 electrostatic	 force	 of	 water molecules, etc.
attraction which can be represented as: (2) Intramolecular hydrogen bond : It is 
Hδ+ – Xδ–	–	–	–	Hδ+ – Xδ–	–	–	–	Hδ+ – Xδ– formed when hydrogen atom is in between 

the	 two	 highly	 electronegative	 (F,	 O,	 N)	
The	magnitude	 of	 H-bonding	 depends	 atoms present within the same molecule. For 

on the physical state of the compound. It is example,	in	o-nitrophenol	the	hydrogen	is	in	
maximum	in	the	solid	state	and	minimum	in	 between	the	two	oxygen	atoms.
the	gaseous	state.	Thus,	the	hydrogen	bonds	
have	strong	influence	on	the	structure	and	
properties of the compounds.
4.9.2 types of H-Bonds
There	are	two	types	of	H-bonds
(i)	 Intermolecular	hydrogen	bond
(ii)	 Intramolecular	hydrogen	bond
(1) Intermolecular hydrogen bond : It is 
formed between two different molecules of the Fig. 4.22 Intramolecular hydrogen bonding in 
same	or	different	compounds.	For	example,	 o-nitrophenol molecule

SUMMARy

Kössel’s	first	insight	into	the	mechanism	of	formation	of	electropositive	and	electronegative	
ions	related	the	process	to	the	attainment	of	noble	gas	configurations	by	the	respective	ions.	
Electrostatic	attraction	between	ions	is	the	cause	for	their	stability.	This	gives	the	concept	
of electrovalency.

The	first	description	of	covalent bonding	was	provided	by	Lewis	in	terms	of	the	sharing	
of electron pairs between atoms and he related the process to the attainment of noble gas 
configurations	by	reacting	atoms	as	a	result	of	sharing	of	electrons.	The	Lewis	dot	symbols	
show	the	number	of	valence	electrons	of	the	atoms	of	a	given	element	and	Lewis	dot	structures	
show pictorial representations of bonding in molecules. 

An	ionic	compound	is	pictured	as	a	three-dimensional	aggregation	of	positive	and	negative	
ions in an ordered arrangement called the crystal lattice. In a crystalline solid there is a 
charge	balance	between	the	positive	and	negative	ions.	The	crystal	lattice	is	stabilized	by	
the enthalpy of lattice formation. 

While	a	single	covalent	bond	is	formed	by	sharing	of	an	electron	pair	between	two	atoms,	
multiple	bonds	result	from	the	sharing	of	two	or	three	electron	pairs.	Some	bonded	atoms	
have	additional	pairs	of	electrons	not	involved	in	bonding.	These	are	called	lone-pairs	of	
electrons.	A	Lewis	dot	structure	shows	the	arrangement	of	bonded	pairs	and	lone	pairs	around	
each atom in a molecule. important parameters, associated with chemical bonds, like: 
bond length, bond angle, bond enthalpy, bond order and bond polarity have significant 
effect on the properties of compounds.

A number of molecules and polyatomic ions cannot be described accurately by a single 
Lewis	structure	and	a	number	of	descriptions	(representations)	based	on	the	same	skeletal	
structure	are	written	and	these	taken	together	represent	the	molecule	or	ion.	This	is	a	very	
important	 and	 extremely	useful	 concept	 called	 resonance.	 The	 contributing	 structures	
or canonical forms taken together constitute the resonance hybrid which represents the 
molecule or ion.

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   132 9/12/2022   9:36:18 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 133

The	VSEPR model used for predicting the geometrical shapes of molecules is based on 
the assumption that electron pairs repel each other and, therefore, tend to remain as far 
apart as possible. According to this model, molecular geometry is determined by repulsions 
between lone pairs and lone pairs; lone pairs and bonding pairs and bonding pairs and bonding 
pairs.	The	order	of	these	repulsions	being	:	lp-lp	>	lp-bp	>	bp-bp

The	valence bond (vB) approach	to	covalent	bonding	is	basically	concerned	with	the	
energetics	of	covalent	bond	formation	about	which	the	Lewis	and	VSEPR	models	are	silent.	
Basically	the	VB	theory	discusses	bond	formation		in	terms	of	overlap	of	orbitals.	For	example	
the	formation	of	the	H2	molecule	from	two	hydrogen	atoms	involves	the	overlap	of	the	1s 
orbitals	of	the	two	H	atoms	which	are	singly	occupied.	It	is	seen	that	the	potential	energy	
of	the	system	gets	lowered	as	the	two	H	atoms	come	near	to	each	other.	At	the	equilibrium	
inter-nuclear	distance	(bond	distance)	the	energy	touches	a	minimum.	Any	attempt	to	bring	
the	nuclei	still	closer	results	in	a	sudden	increase	in	energy	and	consequent	destabilization	
of	the	molecule.	Because	of	orbital	overlap	the	electron	density	between	the	nuclei	increases	
which	helps	in	bringing	them	closer.	It	is	however	seen	that	the	actual	bond	enthalpy	and	
bond	length	values	are	not	obtained	by	overlap	alone	and	other	variables	have	to	be	taken	
into account. 

For	explaining	the	characteristic	shapes	of	polyatomic	molecules	Pauling	introduced	the	
concept of hybridisation of atomic orbitals. sp, sp2, sp3	hybridizations	of	atomic	orbitals	
of	Be,	B,	C,	N	and	O	are	used	to	explain	the	formation	and	geometrical	shapes	of	molecules	
like	BeCl2,	BCl3,	CH4,	NH3	and	H2O.	They	also	explain	the	formation	of	multiple	bonds	in	
molecules like C2H2 and C2H4.  

The	molecular orbital (MO) theory describes bonding in terms of the combination and 
arrangment of atomic orbitals to form molecular orbitals that are associated with the molecule 
as	a	whole.	The	number	of	molecular	orbitals	are	always	equal	to	the	number	of	atomic	
orbitals	from	which	they	are	formed.	Bonding	molecular	orbitals	increase	electron	density	
between	the	nuclei	and	are	lower	in	energy	than	the	individual	atomic	orbitals.	Antibonding	
molecular	orbitals	have	a	region	of	zero	electron	density	between	the	nuclei	and	have	more	
energy	than	the	individual	atomic	orbitals.

The	electronic	configuration	of	the	molecules	is	written	by	filling	electrons	in	the	molecular	
orbitals	in	the	order	of	increasing	energy	levels.	As	in	the	case	of	atoms,	the	Pauli	exclusion	
principle	and	Hund’s	rule	are	applicable	for	the	filling	of	molecular	orbitals.	Molecules	are	
said to be stable if the number of elctrons in bonding molecular orbitals is greater than that 
in antibonding molecular orbitals.

Hydrogen bond	 is	 formed	when	 a	 hydrogen	 atom	 finds	 itself	 between	 two	 highly	
electronegative	atoms	such	as	F,	O	and	N.	It	may	be	intermolecular	(existing	between	two	
or	more	molecules	of	the	same	or	different	substances)	or	intramolecular	(present	within	
the	same	molecule).	Hydrogen	bonds	have	a	powerful	effect	on	the	structure	and	properties	
of many compounds.

EXERCiSES
4.1	 Explain	the	formation	of	a	chemical	bond.
4.2	 Write	Lewis	dot	symbols	for	atoms	of	the	following	elements	:	Mg,	Na,	B,	O,	N,	Br.
4.3	 Write	Lewis	symbols	for	the	following	atoms	and	ions:
	 S	and	S2–; Al and Al3+;	H	and	H–

4.4	 Draw	the	Lewis	structures	for	the	following	molecules	and	ions	:
	 H2S,	SiCl4,	BeF2, CO2−

3 , 	HCOOH
4.5	 Define	octet	rule.	Write	its	significance	and	limitations.

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   133 9/12/2022   9:36:18 AM



134 chemistry

4.6	 Write	the	favourable	factors	for	the	formation	of	ionic	bond.
4.7	 Discuss	the	shape	of	the	following	molecules	using	the	VSEPR	model:
	 BeCl2,	BCl3,	SiCl4, AsF5,	H2S,	PH3 
4.8	 Although	geometries	of	NH3	and	H2O molecules are distorted tetrahedral, bond angle 

in water is less than that of ammonia. Discuss.
4.9	 How	do	you	express	the	bond	strength	in	terms	of	bond	order	?
4.10	 Define	the	bond	length.
4.11	 Explain	the	important	aspects	of	resonance	with	reference	to	the	CO2−

3  ion.
4.12	 H3PO3 can be represented by structures 1 and 2 shown below. Can these two 

structures be taken as the canonical forms of the resonance hybrid representing 
H3PO3	?	If	not,	give	reasons	for	the	same.

4.13	 Write	the	resonance	structures	for	SO −
3,	NO2 and NO3 .

4.14	 Use	Lewis	symbols	to	show	electron	transfer	between	the	following	atoms	to	form	
cations	and	anions	:	(a)	K	and	S		(b)	Ca	and	O	(c)	Al	and	N.

4.15	 Although	both	CO2	and	H2O	are	triatomic	molecules,	the	shape	of	H2O molecule is 
bent while that of CO2	is	linear.	Explain	this	on	the	basis	of	dipole	moment.

4.16	 Write	the	significance/applications	of	dipole	moment.
4.17	 Define	electronegativity.	How	does	it	differ	from	electron	gain	enthalpy	?
4.18	 Explain	with	the	help	of	suitable	example	polar	covalent	bond.
4.19	 Arrange	the	bonds	in	order	of	increasing	ionic	character	in	the	molecules:	LiF,	K2O, 

N2,	SO2 and ClF3. 
4.20	 The	skeletal	structure	of	CH3COOH	as	shown	below	is	correct,	but	some	of	the	bonds	

are	shown	incorrectly.	Write	the	correct	Lewis	structure	for	acetic	acid.

 
4.21	 Apart	from	tetrahedral	geometry,	another	possible	geometry	for	CH4 is square planar 

with	the	four	H	atoms	at	the	corners	of	the	square	and	the	C	atom	at	its	centre.	
Explain	why	CH4 is not square planar ?

4.22	 Explain	why	BeH2	molecule	has	a	zero	dipole	moment	although	the	Be–H	bonds	are	
polar.

4.23	 Which	out	of	NH3	and	NF3 has higher dipole moment and why ?
4.24	 What	is	meant	by	hybridisation	of	atomic	orbitals?	Describe	the	shapes	of	sp, sp2, 

sp3 hybrid orbitals.
4.25	 Describe	the	change	in	hybridisation	(if	any)	of	the	Al	atom	in	the	following	reaction.

 AlCl3  Cl  AlCl4

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   134 9/12/2022   9:36:19 AM



ChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 135

4.26	 Is	there	any	change	in	the	hybridisation	of	B	and	N	atoms	as	a	result	of	the	following	
reaction?

 
4.27	 Draw	diagrams	showing	the	formation	of	a	double	bond	and	a	triple	bond	between	

carbon atoms in C2H4 and C2H2 molecules.
4.28	 What	is	the	total	number	of	sigma	and	pi	bonds	in	the	following	molecules?
	 (a)	C2H2		(b)		C2H4

4.29	 Considering	 x-axis	 as	 the	 internuclear	 axis	 which	 out	 of	 the	 following	 will	
not	 form	a	sigma	bond	and	why?	 	 (a)	1s and 1s	 (b)	1s and 2px;	 (c)	2py and 2py 
(d)	1s and 2s.

4.30	 Which	hybrid	orbitals	are	used	by	carbon	atoms	in	the	following	molecules?
	 CH3–CH3;	(b)	CH3–CH=CH2;	(c)	CH3-CH2-OH;	(d)	CH3-CHO	(e)	CH3COOH
4.31	 What	do	you	understand	by	bond	pairs	and	lone	pairs	of	electrons?	Illustrate	by	

giving	one	exmaple	of	each	type.
4.32	 Distinguish	between	a	sigma	and	a	pi	bond.
4.33	 Explain	the	formation	of	H2	molecule	on	the	basis	of	valence	bond	theory.
4.34	 Write	the	important	conditions	required	for	the	linear	combination	of	atomic	orbitals	

to form molecular orbitals.
4.35	 Use	molecular	orbital	theory	to	explain	why	the	Be2	molecule	does	not	exist.
4.36	 Compare	the	relative	stability	of	the	following	species	and	indicate	their	magnetic	

properties;
 	(superoxide),	O2−

2 	(peroxide)
4.37	 Write	the	significance	of	a	plus	and	a	minus	sign	shown	in	representing	the	orbitals.
4.38	 Describe	the	hybridisation	in	case	of	PCl5.	Why	are	the	axial	bonds	longer	as	compared	

to equatorial bonds?
4.39	 Define	hydrogen	bond.	Is	it	weaker	or	stronger	than	the	van	der	Waals	forces?
4.40	 What	is	meant	by	the	term	bond	order?	Calculate	the	bond	order	of	:	N2, O2, O

+
2 

 and O –
2 .

2024-25

Unit 4.indd   135 9/12/2022   9:36:19 AM