Unit 3

ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and 
PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs

The Periodic Table is arguably the most important concept 
in chemistry, both in principle and in practice. It is the 
everyday support for students, it suggests new avenues 
of research to professionals, and it provides a succinct 

After studying this Unit, you will be organization of the whole of chemistry. It is a remarkable 
able to demonstration of the fact that the chemical elements are 
•	 appreciate how the concept of not a random cluster of entities but instead display trends 

grouping elements in accordance and lie together in families. An awareness of the Periodic 
to their properties led to the Table is essential to anyone who wishes to disentangle 
development of Periodic Table. the world and see how it is built up from the fundamental 

building blocks of the chemistry, the chemical elements.
•	 understand  the Periodic Law; 
•	 understand	 the	 	 significance	 of	  Glenn T. Seaborg

atomic number and electronic 
configuration as the basis for 
periodic	classification;

• In this Unit, we will study the historical development of the 
	 n a m e  t h e  e l e m e n t s  w i t h 

Z >100 according to IUPAC Periodic Table as it stands today and the Modern Periodic 
nomenclature; Law.	We	will	also	 learn	how	 the	periodic	classification	

• follows as a logical consequence of the electronic 
	 classify elements into s, p, d, 

f blocks and learn their main configuration	of	atoms.	Finally,	we	shall	examine	some	of	
characteristics; the periodic trends in the physical and chemical properties 

•	 recognise the periodic trends in of the elements.
physical and chemical properties 
of elements; 3.1 WHy do WE nEEd to Classify ElEmEnts ?

•	 compare the reactivity of elements We know by now that the elements are the basic units of 
and correlate i t  with their all types of matter. In 1800, only 31 elements were known. 
occurrence in nature; By		1865,	the	number	of	identified	elements	had	more	than	

•	 explain the relationship  between doubled to 63. At present 114 elements are known. Of 
ionization enthalpy and metallic them, the recently discovered elements are man-made. 
character; Efforts to synthesise new elements are continuing. With 

•	 use  scienti f ic   vocabulary such	a	 large	number	 of	 elements	 it	 is	 very	difficult	 to	
appropriately to communicate study individually the chemistry of all these elements and 
ideas related to certain important their innumerable compounds individually. To ease out 
p r ope r t i e s  o f  a t oms  e . g . , this problem, scientists searched for a systematic way to 
atomic/ionic radii, ionization organise their knowledge by classifying the elements. Not 
enthalpy, electron gain enthalpy, 
electronegativity, valence of only that it would rationalize known chemical facts about 
elements. elements, but even predict new ones for undertaking 

further study. 

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   74 9/9/2022   4:36:12 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 75

3.2 GEnEsis of PEriodiC the periodic recurrence of properties. This 
ClassifiCation also did not attract much attention. The 

Classification	 of	 elements	 into	 groups	 and	 English chemist, John Alexander Newlands 
development of Periodic Law and Periodic in 1865 profounded the law of octaves. He 
Table are the consequences of systematising arranged the elements in increasing order 
the knowledge gained by a number of of their atomic weights and noted that every 
scientists through their observations and eighth element had properties similar to the 
experiments. The German chemist, Johann first	element	(Table	3.2).	The	relationship	was	
Dobereiner	 in	 early	 1800’s	was	 the	 first	 to	 just like every eighth note that resembles the 
consider the idea of trends among properties first	in	octaves	of	music.	Newlands’s	Law	of	
of elements. By 1829 he noted a similarity Octaves seemed to be true only for elements 
among the physical and chemical properties up to calcium. Although his idea was not 
of several groups of three elements (triads). In widely accepted at that time, he, for his work, 
each case, he noticed that the middle  element was later awarded Davy Medal in 1887 by the 
of each of the triads had an atomic weight Royal Society, London.
about half way between the atomic weights of The Periodic Law, as we know it today 
the other two (Table 3.1). Also the properties owes its development to the Russian chemist, 
of the middle element were in between those Dmitri Mendeleev (1834-1907) and the 
of the other two members. Since Dobereiner’s German chemist, Lothar Meyer (1830-1895). 

table 3.1  dobereiner’s triads

Element atomic 
weight Element atomic 

weight Element atomic 
weight

li 7 Ca 40 Cl 35.5
na 23 sr 88 Br 80
K 39 Ba 137 i 127

relationship, referred to as the law of triads, Working independently, both the chemists in 
seemed to work only for a few elements, it was 1869 proposed that on arranging elements in 
dismissed as coincidence. The next reported the increasing order of their atomic weights, 
attempt to classify elements was made by a similarities appear in physical and chemical 
French	geologist,	A.E.B.	de	Chancourtois	in	 properties at regular intervals. Lothar Meyer 
1862. He arranged the then known elements plotted the physical properties such as 
in order of increasing atomic weights and atomic volume, melting point and boiling 
made a cylindrical table of elements to display point against atomic weight and obtained 

  table 3.2  newlands’ octaves

Element li Be B C n o f
At. wt. 7 9 11 12 14 16 19

Element na mg al si P s Cl
At. wt. 23 24 27 29 31 32 35.5

Element K Ca
At. wt. 39 40

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   75 9/9/2022   4:36:12 PM



76 chemistry

a periodically repeated pattern. Unlike classification	 if	 the	 order	 of	 atomic	weight	
Newlands, Lothar Meyer observed a change was strictly followed. He ignored the order 
in length of that repeating pattern. By 1868, of atomic weights, thinking that the atomic 
Lothar Meyer had developed a table of the measurements might be incorrect, and placed 
elements that closely resembles the Modern the elements with similar properties together. 
Periodic Table. However, his work was not For	example,	iodine	with	lower	atomic	weight	
published until after the work of Dmitri than that of tellurium (Group VI) was placed 
Mendeleev, the scientist who is generally in	Group	VII	 along	with	 fluorine,	 chlorine,	
credited with the development of the Modern bromine because of similarities in properties 
Periodic Table. (Fig.	 3.1).	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 keeping	 his	

While Dobereiner initiated the study of primary aim of arranging the elements of 
periodic relationship, it was Mendeleev who similar properties in the same group, he 
was responsible for publishing the Periodic proposed that some of the elements were 
Law	for	the	first	time.	It	states	as	follows	: still undiscovered and, therefore, left several 

gaps	in	the	table.	For	example,	both	gallium	
The properties of the elements are and germanium were unknown at the time 
a periodic function of their atomic Mendeleev published his Periodic Table. 
weights. He left the gap under aluminium and a gap 

Mendeleev arranged elements in horizontal under silicon, and called these elements 
rows and vertical columns of a table in order Eka-aluminium and Eka-silicon. Mendeleev 
of their increasing atomic weights in such a predicted not only the existence of gallium and 
way that the elements with similar properties germanium, but also described some of their 
occupied the same vertical column or group. general physical properties.  These elements 
Mendeleev’s system of classifying elements were discovered later. Some of the properties 
was more elaborate than that of Lothar predicted by Mendeleev for these elements 
Meyer’s.	He	fully	recognized	the	significance	 and those found experimentally are listed in 
of periodicity and used broader range of Table 3.3. 
physical and chemical properties to classify 
the elements. In particular, Mendeleev relied The boldness of Mendeleev’s quantitative 
on the similarities in the empirical formulas predictions and their eventual success 
and properties of the compounds formed by made him and his Periodic Table famous. 
the elements. He realized that some of the Mendeleev’s Periodic Table published in 1905 
elements	 did	 not	 fit	 in	with	 his	 scheme	 of	 is	shown	in	Fig.	3.1.

table 3.3 mendeleev’s Predictions for the Elements Eka-aluminium (Gallium) and 
Eka-silicon (Germanium)

Property Eka-aluminium Gallium Eka-silicon Germanium 
(predicted) (found) (predicted) (found)

atomic weight 68 70 72 72.6

density/(g/cm3) 5.9 5.94 5.5 5.36

melting point/K Low 302.93 High 1231

formula of oxide E2O3 Ga2O3 EO2 GeO2

formula of chloride E Cl3 GaCl3 ECl4 GeCl4

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   76 9/9/2022   4:36:12 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 77

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   77 9/9/2022   4:36:12 PM

PERIODIC	SYSTEM	OF	THE	ELEMENTS	IN	GROUPS	AND	SERIES

Fig. 3.1  Mendeleev’s Periodic Table published earlier



78 chemistry

3.3 modErn PEriodiC laW and tHE physical and chemical properties of elements 
PrEsEnt form of tHE PEriodiC and their compounds.
taBlE Numerous forms of Periodic Table have 

We must bear in mind that when Mendeleev been devised from time to time. Some 
developed his Periodic table, chemists forms emphasise chemical reactions and 
knew nothing about the internal structure valence, whereas others stress the electronic 
of atom. However, the beginning of the 20th configuration	of	elements.	A	modern	version,	
century witnessed profound developments the so-called “long form” of the Periodic 
in theories about sub-atomic particles. In table	of	the	elements	(Fig.	3.2),	is	the	most	
1913, the English physicist, Henry Moseley convenient and widely used. The horizontal 
observed regularities in the characteristic rows (which Mendeleev called series) are 
X-ray spectra of the elements. A plot of  called periods and the vertical columns, 
(where 	 is frequency of X-rays emitted) groups. Elements having similar outer 
against atomic number (Z) gave a straight electronic configurations in their atoms 
line and not the plot of  vs atomic mass. are arranged in vertical columns, referred 
He thereby showed that the atomic number to as groups or families. According to the 
is a more fundamental property of an element recommendation of International Union of 
than its atomic mass. mendeleev’s Periodic Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), the 
law	was,	therefore,	accordingly	modified.	This	 groups are numbered from 1 to 18 replacing 
is known as the modern Periodic law and the older notation of groups IA …  VIIA, VIII, 

IB …  VIIB and 0.
can	be	stated	as	:

There are altogether seven periods. The 
The physical and chemical properties period number corresponds to the highest 
of the elements are periodic functions principal quantum number (n) of the elements 
of their atomic numbers. in	 the	 period.	 The	 first	 period	 contains	 2	
The Periodic law revealed important elements. The subsequent periods consists of 

analogies among the 94 naturally occurring 8, 8, 18, 18 and 32 elements, respectively. The 
elements (neptunium and plutonium like seventh period is incomplete and like the sixth 
actinium and protoactinium are also found period would have a theoretical maximum 
in pitch blende – an ore of uranium). It (on the basis of quantum numbers) of 32 
stimulated renewed interest in Inorganic elements. In this form of the Periodic Table, 
Chemistry and has carried into the present 14 elements of both sixth and seventh periods 
with the creation of artificially produced (lanthanoids and actinoids, respectively) are 
short-lived elements. placed in separate panels at the bottom*.

You may recall that the atomic number 
is equal to the nuclear charge (i.e., number 3.4 nomEnClatUrE of ElEmEnts 
of protons) or the number of electrons in WitH atomiC nUmBErs > 100
a neutral atom. It is then easy to visualize The naming of the new elements had been 
the	 significance	 of	 quantum	numbers	 and	 traditionally the privilege of the discoverer 
electronic	 configurations	 in	 periodicity	 of	 (or discoverers) and the suggested name was 
elements. In fact, it is now recognized that the ratified	by	the	IUPAC.	In	recent	years	this	has	
Periodic Law is essentially the consequence led to some controversy. The new elements 
of the periodic variation in electronic with very high atomic numbers are so unstable 
configurations,	which	indeed	determine	the	 that only minute quantities, sometimes only 

* Glenn T. Seaborg’s work in the middle of the 20th century starting with the discovery of plutonium in 1940, followed by 
those of all the transuranium elements from 94 to 102 led to reconfiguration of the periodic table placing the actinoids below 
the lanthanoids. In 1951, Seaborg was awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry for his work. Element 106 has been named 
Seaborgium (Sg) in his honour.

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   78 9/9/2022   4:36:13 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 79

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   79 9/9/2022   4:36:13 PM

0

IA      IIA III B     IV B     V B     VI B     VII B

III A    IV A    V A      VI A    VII A     ← VIII  →       I B       II B

Fig. 3.2  Long form of the Periodic Table of the Elements with their atomic numbers and ground state outer electronic 
configurations. The groups are numbered 1-18 in accordance with the 1984 IUPAC recommendations. This 
notation replaces the old numbering scheme of  IA–VIIA, VIII, IB–VIIB and 0 for the elements. 



80 chemistry

a few atoms of them are obtained. Their digits which make up the atomic number and 
synthesis and characterisation, therefore, “ium” is added at the end. The IUPAC names 
require highly sophisticated costly equipment for elements with Z above 100 are shown in 
and laboratory. Such work is carried out with Table 3.5.
competitive spirit only in some laboratories 
in the world. Scientists, before collecting the table 3.4 notation for iUPaC 
reliable data on the new element, at times nomenclature of Elements
get	 tempted	 to	 claim	 for	 its	 discovery.	 For	
example, both American and Soviet scientists digit name abbreviation
claimed credit for discovering element 104. 0 nil n
The Americans named it Rutherfordium 

1 un u
whereas Soviets named it Kurchatovium. To 

2 bi b
avoid such problems, the IUPAC has made 

3 tri t
recommendation that until a new element’s 
discovery	is	proved,	and	its	name	is	officially	 4 quad q

recognised, a systematic nomenclature be 5 pent p

derived directly from the atomic number of 6 hex h

the element using the numerical roots for 7 sept s

0 and numbers 1-9. These are shown in 8 oct o

Table 3.4. The roots are put together in order of 9 enn e

table 3.5  nomenclature of Elements with atomic number above 100

atomic name according to aC iUPaC
number iUPaC nomenclature symbol iUP

Official Name symbol

101 Unnilunium Unu Mendelevium Md
102 Unnilbium Unb Nobelium No
103 Unniltrium Unt Lawrencium Lr
104 Unnilquadium Unq Rutherfordium Rf
105 Unnilpentium Unp Dubnium Db
106 Unnilhexium Unh Seaborgium Sg
107 Unnilseptium Uns Bohrium Bh
108 Unniloctium Uno Hassium Hs
109 Unnilennium Une Meitnerium Mt
110 Ununnillium Uun Darmstadtium Ds
111 Unununnium Uuu Rontgenium Rg
112 Ununbium Uub Copernicium Cn
113 Ununtrium Uut Nihonium  Nh
114 Ununquadium Uuq Flerovium Fl
115 Ununpentium Uup Moscovium Mc
116 Ununhexium Uuh Livermorium Lv
117 Ununseptium Uus Tennessine Ts
118 Ununoctium Uuo Oganesson Og

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   80 9/9/2022   4:36:13 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 81

Thus, the new element first gets a be readily seen that the number of elements 
temporary name, with symbol consisting in each period is twice the number of atomic 
of three letters. Later permanent name orbitals available in the energy level that is 
and symbol are given by a vote of IUPAC being	filled.	The	first	period	(n = 1) starts with 
representatives from each country. The the	filling	of	the	lowest	level	(1s) and therefore 
permanent	name	might	reflect	the	country	 has two elements — hydrogen (ls1) and helium 
(or state of the country) in which the element (ls2)	when	the	first	shell	(K) is completed. The 
was discovered, or pay tribute to a notable second period (n = 2) starts with lithium and the 
scientist. As of now, elements with atomic third electron enters the 2s orbital. The next 
numbers up to 118 have been discovered. element, beryllium has four electrons and has 
Official	 names	 of	 all	 elements	 have	 been	 the	electronic	configuration	1s22s2. Starting 
announced by IUPAC. from the next element boron, the 2p orbitals 

are	filled	with	electrons	when	the	L shell is 
Problem 3.1 completed at neon (2s22p6). Thus there are 
What would be the IUPAC name and 8 elements in the second period. The third 
symbol for the element with atomic period (n = 3) begins at sodium, and the added 
number 120? electron enters a 3s	orbital.	Successive	filling	

of 3s and 3p orbitals gives rise to the third 
solution period of 8 elements from sodium to argon. The 
From	Table	3.4,	the	roots	for	1,	2	and	0	 fourth period (n = 4) starts at potassium, and 
are un, bi and nil, respectively. Hence, the	added	electrons	fill	up	the	4s orbital. Now 
the symbol and the name respectively you may note that before the 4p	orbital	is	filled,	
are Ubn and unbinilium. filling	up	of	3d orbitals becomes energetically 

favourable and we come across the so called 3d 
3.5 ElECtroniC ConfiGUrations transition series of elements. This starts from 

of ElEmEnts and tHE PEriodiC scandium (Z = 21) which has the electronic 
taBlE configuration	3d14s2. The 3d	orbitals	are	filled	

In the preceding unit we have learnt that an at zinc (Z=30)	with	 electronic	 configuration	 
electron in an atom is characterised by a set 3d104s2. The fourth period ends at krypton 
of four quantum numbers, and the principal with	the	filling	up	of	the	4p orbitals. Altogether 
quantum number (n	)	defines	the	main	energy	 we have 18 elements in this fourth period. The 
level known as shell. We have also studied fifth	period	(n = 5) beginning with rubidium 
about	 the	 filling	 of	 electrons	 into	 different	 is similar to the fourth period and contains 
subshells, also referred to as orbitals (s, p, the 4d transition series starting at yttrium 
d, f ) in an atom. The distribution of electrons (Z = 39). This period ends at xenon with the 
into orbitals of an atom is called its electronic filling	up	of	the	5p orbitals. The sixth period 
configuration. An element’s location in the (n = 6) contains 32 elements and successive 
Periodic	Table	reflects	the	quantum	numbers	 electrons enter 6s, 4f, 5d and 6p orbitals, in 
of	 the	 last	 orbital	 filled.	 In	 this	 section	we	 the	order	—	filling	up	of	the	4f orbitals begins 
will observe a direct connection between the with cerium (Z = 58) and ends at lutetium 
electronic	configurations	of	the	elements	and	 (Z = 71) to give the 4f-inner transition series 
the long form of the Periodic Table. which is called the lanthanoid series. The 

seventh period (n = 7) is similar to the sixth 
(a)  Electronic Configurations in Periods period	with	 the	 successive	 filling	up	 of	 the	
The period indicates the value of n for the 7s, 5f, 6d and 7p orbitals and includes most 
outermost or valence shell. In other words, of the man-made radioactive elements. This 
successive period in the Periodic Table is period will end at the element with atomic 
associated	with	the	filling	of	the	next	higher	 number 118 which would belong to the noble 
principal energy level (n = 1, n = 2, etc.). It can gas family.	Filling	up	of	the	5f orbitals after 

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   81 9/9/2022   4:36:13 PM



82 chemistry

actinium (Z = 89) gives the 5f-inner transition a theoretical foundation for the periodic 
series known as the actinoid series. The 4f- classification.	The	elements	in	a	vertical	column	
and 5f-inner transition series of elements of the Periodic Table constitute a group or 
are placed separately in the Periodic Table family and exhibit similar chemical behaviour. 
to maintain its structure and to preserve the This similarity arises because these elements 
principle	of	classification	by	keeping	elements	 have the same number and same distribution 
with similar properties in a single column. of electrons in their outermost orbitals. We 

can classify the elements into four blocks viz., 
Problem 3.2 s-block, p-block, d-block and f-block 
How would you justify the presence depending on the type of atomic orbitals that 
of 18 elements in the 5th period of the are	being	filled	with	electrons.	This	is	illustrated	
Periodic Table? in	Fig.	3.3.	We	notice	two	exceptions	to	this	
solution categorisation. Strictly, helium belongs to the 
When n = 5, l = 0, 1, 2, 3. The order s-block but its positioning in the p-block 
in which the energy of the available along with other group 18 elements is 
orbitals 4d, 5s and 5p increases is 5s justified	 because	 it	 has	 a	 completely	 filled	
< 4d < 5p. The total number of orbitals valence shell (1s2) and as a result, exhibits 
available are 9. The maximum number properties characteristic of other noble gases. 
of electrons that can be accommodated The other exception is hydrogen. It has only 
is 18; and therefore 18 elements are one s-electron and hence can be placed in 
there in the 5th period. group 1 (alkali  metals) .  It  can also 

gain an electron to achieve a noble gas 
(b) Groupwise Electronic Configurations arrangement and hence it can behave 
Elements in the same vertical column or similar to a group 17 (halogen family) 
group have similar valence shell electronic elements. Because it is a special case, we 
configurations,	the	same	number	of	electrons	 shall place hydrogen separately at the top of 
in the outer orbitals, and similar properties. the	Periodic	Table	as	shown	in	Fig.	3.2	and	 
For	 example,	 the	Group	 1	 elements	 (alkali	 Fig.	 3.3.	We	will	 briefly	discuss	 the	 salient	
metals) all have ns1 valence shell electronic features of the four types of elements marked in 
configuration	as	shown	below. the Periodic Table. More about these elements 

atomic number symbol Electronic configuration
3 Li 1s22s1 (or) [He]2s1

11 Na 1s22s22p63s1 (or) [Ne]3s1

19 K 1s22s22p63s23p64s1 (or) [Ar]4s1

37 Rb 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p65s1 (or) [Kr]5s1

55 Cs 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p64d105s25p66s1 (or) [Xe]6s1

87 Fr [Rn]7s1

Thus it can be seen that the properties of will be discussed later. During the description 
an element have periodic dependence upon of their features certain terminology has been 
its atomic number and not on relative atomic used	which	has	been	classified	in	section	3.7.
mass.
3.6 ElECtroniC ConfiGUrations 3.6.1 the s-Block Elements

and  tyPEs  of  ElEmEnts : The elements of Group 1 (alkali metals) and 
S-, P-, d-, F- BloCKs Group 2 (alkaline earth metals) which have 

The aufbau (build up) principle and the ns1 and ns2 outermost	electronic	configuration	
electronic configuration of atoms provide belong to the s-Block Elements. They are all 

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   82 9/9/2022   4:36:13 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 83

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   83 11/2/2022   4:28:19 PM

Nh Mc Ts Og

Fig. 3.3  The types of elements in the Periodic Table based on the orbitals that  
are being filled. Also shown is the broad division of elements into METALS 
(                       ), NON-METALS (            ) and METALLOIDS (      ).



84 chemistry

reactive metals with low ionization enthalpies. valence (oxidation states), paramagnetism and 
They lose the outermost electron(s) readily to oftenly used as catalysts. However, Zn, Cd and 
form 1+ ion (in the case of alkali metals) or 2+ Hg which have the electronic configuration, 
ion (in the case of alkaline earth metals). The (n-1) d10ns2 do not show most of the properties 
metallic character and the reactivity increase of transition elements. In a way, transition 
as we go down the group. Because of high metals form a bridge between the chemically 
reactivity they are never found pure in nature. active metals of s-block elements and the 
The compounds of the s-block elements, with less active elements of Groups 13 and 14 and 
the exception of those of lithium and beryllium thus take their familiar name “Transition 
are predominantly ionic. Elements”.

3.6.2 The p-Block Elements 3.6.4 The f-Block Elements  
 (Inner-Transition Elements)

The p-Block Elements comprise those 
belonging to Group 13 to 18 and these The two rows of elements at the bottom of 
together with the s-Block Elements are the Periodic Table, called the Lanthanoids, 
called the Ce(Z = 58) – Lu(Z = 71) and Actinoids, 

Representative Elements or Main Th(Z = 90) – Lr (Z = 103) are characterised by 
Group Elements. The outermost electronic the outer electronic configuration (n-2)f1-14 
configuration varies from ns2np1 to ns2np6 (n-1)d0–1ns2. The last electron added to each 
in each period. At the end of each period is element is filled in f- orbital. These two series 
a noble gas element with a closed valence of elements are hence called the Inner-
shell ns2np6 configuration. All the orbitals Transition Elements (f-Block Elements). 
in the valence shell of the noble gases are They are all metals. Within each series, the 
completely filled by electrons and it is very properties of the elements are quite similar. 
difficult to alter this stable arrangement by The chemistry of the early actinoids is 
the addition or removal of electrons. The more complicated than the corresponding 
noble gases thus exhibit very low chemical lanthanoids, due to the large number of 
reactivity. Preceding the noble gas family oxidation states possible for these actinoid 
are two chemically important groups of non- elements. Actinoid elements are radioactive. 
metals. They are the halogens (Group 17) and Many of the actinoid elements have been made 
the chalcogens (Group 16). These two groups only in nanogram quantities or even less by 

nuclear reactions and their chemistry is not 
of elements have highly negative electron fully studied. The elements after uranium are 
gain enthalpies and readily add one or two called Transuranium Elements.
electrons respectively to attain the stable 
noble gas configuration. The non-metallic Problem 3.3
character increases as we move from left to 
right across a period and metallic character The elements  Z = 117 and 120 have not yet 

been discovered. In which family/group 
increases as we go down the group. would you place these elements and 
3.6.3 The d-Block Elements (Transition also give the electronic configuration in 

each case.
 Elements)
These are the elements of Group 3 to 12 in Solution
the centre of the Periodic Table. These are We see from Fig. 3.2, that element 
characterised by the filling of inner d orbitals with Z = 117, would belong to the 
by electrons and are therefore referred to as halogen family (Group 17) and the 
d-Block Elements. These elements have electronic configuration would be [Rn] 

5f146d10
the general outer electronic configuration 7s27p5. The element with Z = 120, 

will be placed in Group 2 (alkaline earth 
(n-1)d1-10ns0-2 except for Pd where its electronic metals), and will have the electronic 
configuration is 4d105s0.. They are all metals. configuration [Uuo]8s2.
They mostly form coloured ions, exhibit variable 

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   84 11/2/2022   4:28:19 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 85

3.6.5 metals, non-metals and metalloids
solution

In	 addition	 to	 displaying	 the	 classification	
of elements into s-, p-, d-, and f-blocks, Metallic character increases down a 
Fig.	3.3	shows	another	broad	classification	 group and decreases along a period as 

we move from left to right. Hence the 
of elements based on their properties. The order of increasing metallic character 
elements can be divided into metals and is:	P	<	Si	<	Be	<	Mg	<	Na.
non-metals. Metals comprise more than 
78% of all known elements and appear on 3.7 PEriodiC trEnds in ProPErtiEs 
the left side of the Periodic table. Metals are of ElEmEnts
usually solids at room temperature [mercury 
is an exception; gallium and caesium also There are many observable patterns in the 

physical and chemical properties of elements 
have very low melting points (303K and as we descend in a group or move across a 
302K, respectively)]. Metals usually have high period	 in	 the	 Periodic	 Table.	 For	 example,	
melting and boiling points. They are good within a period, chemical reactivity tends to 
conductors of heat and electricity. They are be high in Group 1 metals, lower in elements 
malleable	(can	be	flattened	into	thin	sheets	by	 towards the middle of the table, and increases 
hammering) and ductile (can be drawn into to a maximum in the Group 17 non-metals. 
wires). In contrast, non-metals are located at Likewise within a group of representative 
the top right hand side of the Periodic table. metals (say alkali metals) reactivity increases 
In fact, in a horizontal row, the property of on moving down the group, whereas within a 
elements change from metallic on the left to group of non-metals (say halogens), reactivity 
non-metallic on the right. Non-metals are decreases down the group. But why do the 
usually solids or gases at room temperature properties of elements follow these trends? 
with low melting and boiling points (boron And how can we explain periodicity? To 
and carbon are exceptions). They are poor answer these questions, we must look into the 
conductors of heat and electricity. Most non- theories of atomic structure and properties 
metallic solids are brittle and are neither of the atom. In this section we shall discuss 
malleable nor ductile. The elements become the periodic trends in certain physical and 
more metallic as we go down a group; the chemical properties and try to explain them 
non-metallic character increases as one goes in terms of number of electrons and energy 
from left to right across the Periodic table. levels.
The change from metallic to non-metallic 
character is not abrupt as shown by the thick 3.7.1 trends in Physical Properties
zig-zag	 line	 in	 Fig.	 3.3.	 The	 elements	 (e.g.,	 There are numerous physical properties of 
silicon, germanium, arsenic, antimony and elements such as melting and boiling points, 
tellurium) bordering this line and running heats of fusion and vaporization, energy 
diagonally across the Periodic table show of atomization, etc. which show periodic 
properties that are characteristic of both variations. However, we shall discuss the 
metals and non-metals. These elements are periodic trends with respect to atomic and 
called semi-metals or metalloids. ionic radii, ionization enthalpy, electron gain 

enthalpy and electronegativity.
Problem 3.4 (a) Atomic Radius
Considering the atomic number and You	 can	 very	well	 imagine	 that	finding	 the	
position in the periodic table, arrange size of an atom is a lot more complicated than 
the following elements in the increasing 
order	of	metallic	character	:	Si,	Be,	Mg,	 measuring the radius of a ball. Do you know 
Na, P. why?	 Firstly,	 because	 the	 size	 of	 an	 atom	 

(~ 1.2 Å i.e., 1.2 × 10–10 m in radius) is very 

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   85 9/9/2022   4:36:14 PM



86 chemistry

small. Secondly, since the electron cloud The atomic radii of a few elements are listed 
surrounding the atom does not have a sharp in Table 3.6. Two trends are obvious. We can 
boundary, the determination of the atomic explain these trends in terms of nuclear charge 
size cannot be precise. In other words, there and energy level. The atomic size generally 
is no practical way by which the size of an decreases across a period as illustrated in 
individual atom can be measured. However, Fig.	 3.4(a)	 for	 the	 elements	 of	 the	 second	
an estimate of the atomic size can be made by period. It is because within the period the 
knowing the distance between the atoms in outer electrons are in the same valence shell 
the combined state. One practical approach to and the effective nuclear charge increases 
estimate the size of an atom of a non-metallic as the atomic number increases resulting in 
element is to measure the distance between the increased attraction of electrons to the 
two atoms when they are bound together nucleus. Within a family or vertical column 
by a single bond in a covalent molecule and of the periodic table, the atomic radius 
from this value, the “Covalent radius” of the increases regularly with atomic number as 
element	can	be	calculated.	For	example,	the	 illustrated	 in	 Fig.	 3.4(b).	 For	 alkali	metals	
bond distance in the chlorine molecule (Cl2) and halogens, as we descend the groups, 
is 198 pm and half this distance (99 pm), is the principal quantum number (n) increases 
taken	as	the	atomic	radius	of	chlorine.	For	 and the valence electrons are farther from 
metals,	we	define	the	term	“metallic radius” 
which is taken as half the internuclear the nucleus. This happens because the inner 
distance separating the metal cores in the energy	levels	are	filled	with	electrons,	which	
metallic	 crystal.	 For	 example,	 the	 distance	 serve to shield the outer electrons from the 
between two adjacent copper atoms in solid pull of the nucleus. Consequently the size of 
copper is 256 pm; hence the metallic radius the	atom	increases	as	reflected	in	the	atomic	
of	copper	is	assigned	a	value	of	128	pm.	For	 radii.
simplicity, in this book, we use the term Note that the atomic radii of noble gases 
atomic radius to refer to both covalent or are not considered here. Being monoatomic, 
metallic radius depending on whether the their (non-bonded radii) values are very 
element is a non-metal or a metal. Atomic large. In fact radii of noble gases should be 
radii can be measured by X-ray or other compared not with the covalent radii but with 
spectroscopic methods. the van der Waals radii of other elements.

table 3.6(a)  atomic radii/pm across the Periods
atom (Period ii) li Be B C n o f
atomic radius 152 111 88 77 74 66 64
atom (Period iii) na mg al si P s Cl
atomic radius 186 160 143 117 110 104 99

 table 3.6(b)  atomic radii/pm down a family
atom  atomic  atom  atomic  

(Group i) radius (Group 17) radius
li 152 f 64
na 186 Cl 99
K 231 Br 114
rb 244 i 133
Cs 262 at 140

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   86 9/9/2022   4:36:14 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 87

Fig. 3.4 (a)  Variation of atomic radius with atomic Fig. 3.4 (b) Variation of atomic radius with 
number across the second period atomic number for alkali metals and 

halogens

(b) Ionic Radius cation with the greater positive charge will 
The removal of an electron from an atom have a smaller radius because of the greater 
results in the formation of a cation, whereas attraction of the electrons to the nucleus. 
gain of an electron leads to an anion. The Anion with the greater negative charge will 
ionic radii can be estimated by measuring have the larger radius. In this case, the net 
the distances between cations and anions repulsion of the electrons will outweigh the 
in ionic crystals. In general, the ionic radii nuclear charge and the ion will expand in size.
of elements exhibit the same trend as the 
atomic radii. A cation is smaller than its Problem 3.5
parent atom because it has fewer electrons Which of the following species will have 
while its nuclear charge remains the same. the largest and the smallest size?

Mg, Mg2+, Al, Al3+
The size of an anion will be larger than that of .
the parent atom because the addition of one solution
or more electrons would result in increased Atomic radii decrease across a period. 
repulsion among the electrons and a decrease Cations are smaller than their parent 
in	effective	nuclear	charge.	For	example,	the	 atoms. Among isoelectronic species, 
ionic	 radius	 of	 fluoride	 ion	 (F–) is 136 pm the one with the larger positive nuclear 
whereas	the	atomic	radius	of	fluorine	is	only	 charge will have a smaller radius.
64 pm. On the other hand, the atomic radius Hence the largest species is Mg; the 
of sodium is 186 pm compared to the ionic smallest one is Al3+.
radius of 95 pm for Na+.

When	we	find	some	atoms	and	ions	which	 (c) Ionization Enthalpy
contain the same number of electrons, we call A quantitative measure of the tendency of 
them isoelectronic species*.	For	 example,	 an element to lose electron is given by its 
O2–,	F–, Na+ and Mg2+ have the same number ionization Enthalpy. It represents the 
of electrons (10). Their radii would be different energy required to remove an electron from an 
because of their different nuclear charges. The isolated gaseous atom (X) in its ground state. 

*  Two or more species with same number of atoms, same number of valence electrons and same structure, regardless of the 
nature of elements involved.

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   87 9/9/2022   4:36:14 PM



88 chemistry

In	other	words,	the	first	ionization enthalpy 
for an element X is the enthalpy change 
(∆ H) for the reaction depicted in equation 3.1.

i 

X(g) → X+(g) + e–           (3.1)
The ionization enthalpy is expressed in 

units of kJ mol–1.	We	can	define	the	second	
ionization enthalpy as the energy required 
to remove the second most loosely bound 
electron; it is the energy required to carry out 
the reaction shown in equation 3.2.
X+(g) → X2+(g) + e–           (3.2)

Energy is always required to remove 
electrons from an atom and hence ionization Fig. 3.5  Variation of first ionization enthalpies 
enthalpies are always positive. The second (∆iH) with atomic number for elements 
ionization enthalpy will be higher than the with Z = 1 to 60

first	 ionization	enthalpy	because	 it	 is	more	 can be correlated with their high reactivity. 
difficult	to	remove	an	electron	from	a	positively	 In addition, you will notice two trends the 
charged ion than from a neutral atom. In the first	ionization	enthalpy	generally	increases	
same way the third ionization enthalpy will be as we go across a period and decreases 
higher than the second and so on. The term as we descend in a group. These trends 
“ionization	enthalpy”,	if	not	qualified,	is	taken	 are	 illustrated	 in	 Figs.	 3.6(a)	 and	 3.6(b)	
as	the	first	ionization	enthalpy. respectively for the elements of the second 

The	first	ionization	enthalpies	of	elements	 period	 and	 the	 first	 group	 of	 the	 periodic	
having atomic numbers up to 60 are plotted table. You will appreciate that the ionization 
in	 Fig.	 3.5.	 The	 periodicity	 of	 the	 graph	 is	 enthalpy and atomic radius are closely related 
quite	 striking.	You	will	find	maxima	at	 the	 properties. To understand these trends, we 
noble gases which have closed electron shells have	to	consider	two	factors	:	(i)	the	attraction	
and	very	stable	electron	configurations.	On	 of electrons towards the nucleus, and (ii) the 
the other hand, minima occur at the alkali repulsion of electrons from each other. The 
metals and their low ionization enthalpies effective nuclear charge experienced by a 

3.6 (a) 3.6 (b)
Fig. 3.6(a) F i rs t  ion izat ion enthalp ies  (∆ H) of  e lements of  the second per iod as a 

i
function of atomic number (Z) and Fig. 3.6(b) ∆ H of alkali metals as a function of Z. 

i

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   88 9/9/2022   4:36:14 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 89

valence electron in an atom will be less than the 2s electrons of beryllium. Therefore, it is 
the actual charge on the nucleus because of easier to remove the 2p-electron from boron 
“shielding” or “screening” of the valence compared to the removal of a 2s- electron from 
electron from the nucleus by the intervening beryllium.	 Thus,	 boron	 has	 a	 smaller	 first	
core	electrons.	For	example,	the	2s electron ionization enthalpy than beryllium. Another 
in lithium is shielded from the nucleus by “anomaly” is the smaller first ionization 
the inner core of 1s electrons. As a result, the enthalpy of oxygen compared to nitrogen. This 
valence electron experiences a net positive arises because in the nitrogen atom, three 
charge which is  less than the actual charge 2p-electrons reside in different atomic orbitals 
of +3. In general, shielding is effective when (Hund’s rule) whereas in the oxygen atom, 
the orbitals in the inner shells are completely two of the four 2p-electrons must occupy the 
filled.	 This	 situation	 occurs	 in	 the	 case	 of	 same 2p-orbital resulting in an increased 
alkali metals which have single outermost electron-electron repulsion. Consequently, 
ns-electron preceded by a noble gas electronic it is easier to remove the fourth 2p-electron 
configuration. from oxygen than it is, to remove one of the 

When	we	move	 from	 lithium	 to	fluorine	 three 2p-electrons from nitrogen.
across the second period, successive electrons 
are added to orbitals in the same principal Problem 3.6 
quantum level and the shielding of the nuclear The	first	ionization	enthalpy	(∆ H ) values 

i 
charge by the inner core of electrons does of the third period elements, Na, Mg and 
not increase very much to compensate for Si are respectively 496, 737 and 786 kJ  
the increased attraction of the electron to the mol–1.	Predict	whether	the	first	∆ H value 

i 
nucleus. Thus, across a period, increasing for Al will be more close to 575 or 760 kJ  
nuclear charge outweighs the shielding. mol–1 ? Justify your answer.
Consequently, the outermost electrons are solution 
held more and more tightly and the ionization 

It will be more close to 575 kJ mol–1
enthalpy increases across a period. As we go . 
down a group, the outermost electron being The value for Al should be lower than 

that of Mg because of effective shielding 
increasingly farther from the nucleus, there is of 3p electrons from the nucleus by  
an increased shielding of the nuclear charge 3s-electrons.
by the electrons in the inner levels. In this 
case, increase in shielding outweighs the (d) Electron Gain Enthalpy 
increasing nuclear charge and the removal of 
the outermost electron requires less energy When an electron is added to a neutral 
down a group. gaseous atom (X) to convert it into a negative 

ion, the enthalpy change accompanying the 
From	Fig.	3.6(a),	you	will	also	notice	that	 process is defined as the Electron Gain 

the	first	ionization	enthalpy	of	boron	(Z = 5) Enthalpy (∆egH). Electron gain enthalpy 
is slightly less than that of beryllium (Z = 4) provides a measure of the ease with which 
even though the former has a greater nuclear an atom adds an electron to form anion as 
charge. When we consider the same principal represented by equation 3.3.
quantum level, an s-electron is attracted to the 
nucleus more than a p-electron. In beryllium, X(g) + e–  →  X–(g)            (3.3)
the electron removed during the ionization is Depending on the element, the process 
an s-electron whereas the electron removed of adding an electron to the atom can be 
during ionization of boron is a p-electron. The either	endothermic	or	exothermic.	For	many	
penetration of a 2s-electron to the nucleus is elements energy is released when an electron 
more than that of a 2p-electron; hence the 2p is added to the atom and the electron gain 
electron of boron is more shielded from the enthalpy	 is	 negative.	 For	 example,	 group	
nucleus by the inner core of electrons than 17 elements (the halogens) have very high 

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   89 9/9/2022   4:36:15 PM



90 chemistry

table 3.7  Electron Gain Enthalpies* / (kJ mol–1) of some main Group Elements

Group 1 ∆egH Group 16 ∆egH Group 17 ∆egH Group 0 ∆egH
H – 73 He + 48
li – 60 o – 141 f – 328 ne + 116
na – 53 s – 200 Cl – 349 ar +  96
K – 48 se – 195 Br – 325 Kr + 96
rb – 47 te – 190 i – 295 Xe + 77
Cs – 46 Po – 174 at – 270 rn + 68

negative electron gain enthalpies because 
they can attain stable noble gas electronic Problem 3.7
configurations	 by	 picking	 up	 an	 electron.	 Which of the following will have the most 
On the other hand, noble gases have large negative electron gain enthalpy and 
positive electron gain enthalpies because the which the least negative?
electron has to enter the next higher principal P,	S,	Cl,	F.
quantum level leading to a very unstable Explain your answer.
electronic	configuration.	It	may	be	noted	that	 solution
electron gain enthalpies have large negative 
values toward the upper right of the periodic Electron gain enthalpy generally 
table preceding the noble gases. becomes more negative across a 

period as we move from left to right. 
The variation in electron gain enthalpies of Within a group, electron gain enthalpy 

elements is less systematic than for ionization becomes less negative down a group. 
enthalpies. As a general rule, electron gain However, adding an electron to the 
enthalpy becomes more negative with increase 2p-orbital leads to greater repulsion 
in the atomic number across a period. The than adding an electron to the larger  
effective nuclear charge increases from left to 3p-orbital. Hence the element with 
right across a period and consequently it will most negative electron gain enthalpy is 
be easier to add an electron to a smaller atom chlorine; the one with the least negative 
since the added electron on an average would electron gain enthalpy is phosphorus.
be closer to the positively charged nucleus. We 
should also expect electron gain enthalpy to (e) Electronegativity
become less negative as we go down a group 
because the size of the atom increases and A qualitative measure of the ability of an atom 
the added electron would be farther from the in a chemical compound to attract shared 
nucleus. This is generally the case (Table electrons to itself is called electronegativity. 
3.7). However, electron gain enthalpy of O or Unlike ionization enthalpy and electron gain 
F	is	less	negative	than	that	of	the	succeeding	 enthalpy, it is not a measureable quantity. 
element. This is because when an electron is However, a number of numerical scales of 
added	to	O	or	F,	the	added	electron	goes	to	 electronegativity of elements viz., Pauling 
the smaller n = 2 quantum level and suffers scale, Mulliken-Jaffe scale, Allred-Rochow 
significant	repulsion	from	the	other	electrons	 scale have been developed. The one which 
present	in	this	level.	For	the	n = 3 quantum is the most widely used is the Pauling scale. 
level (S or Cl), the added electron occupies Linus Pauling, an American scientist, in 1922 
a larger region of space and the electron- assigned	arbitrarily	a	value	of	4.0	to	fluorine,	
electron repulsion is much less. the element considered to have the greatest 
* In many books, the negative of the enthalpy change for the process depicted in equation 3.3 is defined as the ELECTRON 

AFFINITY (A ) of the atom under consideration. If energy is released when an electron is added to an atom, the electron 
e 

affinity is taken as positive, contrary to thermodynamic convention. If energy has to be supplied to add an electron to an 
atom, then the electron affinity of the atom is assigned a negative sign. However, electron affinity is defined as absolute 
zero and, therefore at any other temperature (T) heat capacities of the reactants and the products have to be taken into 
account in ∆ H = –A  – 5/2 RT. 

eg e

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   90 9/9/2022   4:36:15 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 91

ability to attract electrons. Approximate On the same account electronegativity values 
values for the electronegativity of a few decrease with the increase in atomic radii 
elements are given in Table 3.8(a) down a group. The trend is similar to that of 

The electronegativity of any given element ionization enthalpy.
is not constant; it varies depending on the Knowing the relationship between 
element to which it is bound. Though it is electronegativity and atomic radius, can 
not a measurable quantity, it does provide a you now visualise the relationship between 
means of predicting the nature of force that electronegativity and non-metallic properties? 
holds a pair of atoms together – a relationship Non-metallic  elements have strong tendency 
that you will explore later.

Electronegativity generally 
increases across a period from 
left to right (say from lithium to 
fluorine)	and	decrease	down	a	group	
(say	 from	 fluorine	 to	 astatine)	
in the periodic table. How can 
these trends be explained? 
Can the electronegativity be 
related to atomic radii, which 
tend to decrease across each 
period from left to right, but 
increase down each group ? The 
attraction between the outer 
(or valence) electrons and the 
nucleus increases as the atomic 
radius decreases in a period. The 
electronegativity also increases. 

Fig. 3.7  The periodic trends of elements in the periodic table

table 3.8(a)  Electronegativity Values (on Pauling scale) across the Periods
atom (Period ii) li Be B C n o f

Electronegativity 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0

atom (Period iii) na mg al si P s Cl

Electronegativity 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.1 2.5 3.0

table 3.8(b)  Electronegativity Values (on Pauling scale) down a family

atom  Electronegativity atom  Electronegativity 
(Group i) Value (Group 17) Value

li 1.0 f 4.0
na 0.9 Cl 3.0
K 0.8 Br 2.8
rb 0.8 i 2.5
Cs 0.7 at 2.2

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   91 9/9/2022   4:36:15 PM



92 chemistry

to gain electrons. Therefore, electronegativity is with	 outer	 electronic	 configuration	 2s22p5, 
directly related to that non-metallic properties shares	one	electron	with	oxygen	in	the	OF2 
of elements. It can be further extended to say molecule. Being highest electronegative 
that the electronegativity is inversely related element, fluorine is given oxidation state 
to the metallic properties of elements. Thus, –1.	 Since	 there	 are	 two	 fluorine	 atoms	 in	
the increase in electronegativities across this molecule, oxygen with outer electronic 
a period is accompanied by an increase configuration	 2s22p4 shares two electrons 
in non-metallic properties (or decrease in with fluorine atoms and thereby exhibits 
metallic properties) of elements. Similarly, the oxidation state +2. In Na2O, oxygen being 
decrease in electronegativity down a group is more electronegative accepts two electrons, 
accompanied by a decrease in non-metallic one from each of the two sodium atoms and, 
properties (or increase in metallic properties) thus, shows oxidation state –2. On the other 
of elements. hand	 sodium	with	 electronic	 configuration	

All these periodic trends are summarised 3s1 loses one electron to oxygen and is given 
in	Figure	3.7. oxidation state +1. Thus, the oxidation state 

of an element in a particular compound can 
3.7.2 Periodic trends in Chemical   be	defined	as	the	charge	acquired	by	its	atom	
 Properties on the basis of electronegative consideration 
Most of the trends in chemical properties of from other atoms in the molecule.
elements, such as diagonal relationships, inert 
pair effect, effects of lanthanoid contraction Problem 3.8
etc. will be dealt with along the discussion Using the Periodic Table, predict the 
of each group in later units. In this section formulas of compounds which might 
we shall study the periodicity of the valence be formed by the following pairs of 
state shown by elements and the anomalous elements; (a) silicon and bromine  
properties of the second period elements (from (b) aluminium and sulphur.
lithium	to	fluorine). solution
(a) Periodicity of Valence or Oxidation (a) Silicon is group 14 element with 
     States a valence of 4; bromine belongs to 
The valence is the most characteristic property the halogen family with a valence 
of the elements and can be understood in of 1. Hence the formula of the 
terms	of	their	electronic	configurations.		The	 compound formed would be SiBr4.
valence of representative elements is usually (b) Aluminium belongs to group 
(though not necessarily) equal to the number 13 with a valence of 3; sulphur 
of electrons in the outermost orbitals and/or belongs to group 16 elements with 
equal to eight minus the number of outermost a valence of 2. Hence, the formula 

of the compound formed would be 
electrons as shown below. Al2S3.

Nowadays the term oxidation state is 
frequently used for valence. Consider the Some periodic trends observed in the 
two	oxygen	containing	compounds:	OF2 and valence of elements (hydrides and oxides) 
Na2O. The order of electronegativity of the are shown in Table 3.9. Other such periodic 
three elements involved in these compounds trends which occur in the chemical behaviour 
is	F	>	O	>	Na.	Each	of	the	atoms	of	fluorine,	 of the elements are discussed elsewhere in 

Group 1 2 13 14 15 16 17 18
number of valence 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
electron
alence 1 2 3 4 3,5 2,6 1,7 0,8

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   92 9/9/2022   4:36:15 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 93

table 3.9 Periodic trends in Valence of Elements as shown by the formulas of their 
Compounds

Group 1 2 13 14 15 16 17

Formula	of	 LiH CaH2 B2H6 CH4 NH3 H2O HF
hydride NaH AlH3 SiH4 PH3 H2S HCl

KH GeH4 AsH3 H2Se HBr
SnH4 H2Te HI

Formula Li2O MgO B2O3 CO2 N2O3, N2O5 –
of oxide Na2O CaO Al2O3 SiO2 P4O6, P4O10 SO3 Cl2 O7

K Sr
2O

O Ga2O3 GeO2 As2O3, As2O5 SeO3 –
BaO In2O3 SnO2 Sb2O3, Sb2O5 TeO3 –

PbO2 Bi2O3     – –

this book. There are many elements which the second element of the following group 
exhibit variable valence. This is particularly i.e., magnesium and aluminium, respectively. 
characteristic of transition elements and This sort of similarity is commonly referred 
actinoids, which we shall study later. to as diagonal relationship in the periodic 

properties. 
(b) Anomalous Properties of Second 
      Period Elements What are the reasons for the different 
The	 first	 element	 of	 each	 of	 the	 groups	 1	 chemical	 behaviour	 of	 the	 first	member	 of	
(lithium) and 2 (beryllium) and groups 13-17 a group of elements in the s- and p-blocks 
(boron	 to	fluorine)	differs	 in	many	respects	 compared to that of the subsequent members 
from the other members of their respective in the same group? The anomalous behaviour 
group.	 For	 example,	 lithium	 unlike	 other	 is attributed to their small size, large charge/

radius ratio and high electronegativity of the 
alkali metals, and beryllium unlike other elements.	 	 In	addition,	 the	first	member	of	
alkaline earth metals, form compounds with group has only four valence orbitals (2s and 
pronounced covalent character; the other 2p) available for bonding, whereas the second 
members of these groups predominantly member of the groups have nine valence 
form ionic compounds. In fact the behaviour orbitals (3s, 3p, 3d). As a consequence of 
of lithium and beryllium is more similar with this, the maximum covalency of the first 

member of each group is 4 (e.g., boron 
Property Element can only form BF4  , whereas the other 

members of the groups can expand their 
Metallic radius M/pm li Be B valence shell to accommodate more than 

152 111 88 four pairs of electrons e.g., aluminium 
na mg al AlF 3  forms).	Furthermore,	the	first	
186 160 143 6

member of p-block elements displays 
greater ability to form pπ – pπ  multiple 

Ionic radius M+/pm li Be bonds to itself (e.g., C = C, C ≡ C, 
76 31 N = N, N ≡	Ν) and to other second period 
na mg elements (e.g., C = O, C = N, C ≡ N, 
102 72 N = O) compared to subsequent members 

of the same group.

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   93 9/9/2022   4:36:15 PM



94 chemistry

here it can be directly related to the metallic 
Problem 3.9 and non-metallic character of elements. Thus, 
Are the oxidation state and covalency of the metallic character of an element, which 
Al in [AlCl(H2O)5]

2+ same ? is highest at the extremely left decreases and 
solution the non-metallic character increases while 
No. The oxidation state of Al is +3 and moving from left to right across the period. 
the covalency is 6. The chemical reactivity of an element can be 

best shown by its reactions with oxygen and 
3.7.3 Periodic trends and Chemical halogens. Here, we shall consider the reaction 
 reactivity of the elements with oxygen only. Elements 
We have observed the periodic trends in on two extremes of a period easily combine 
certain fundamental properties such as with oxygen to form oxides. The normal oxide 
atomic and ionic radii, ionization enthalpy, formed by the element on extreme left is the 
electron gain enthalpy and valence. We most basic (e.g., Na2O), whereas that formed 
know by now that the periodicity is related to by the element on extreme right is the most 
electronic	configuration.	That	is,	all	chemical	 acidic (e.g., Cl2O7). Oxides of elements in the 
and physical properties are a manifestation of centre are amphoteric (e.g., Al2O3, As2O3) or 
the	electronic	configuration	of	elements.	We	 neutral (e.g., CO, NO, N2O). Amphoteric oxides 
shall now try to explore relationships between behave as acidic with bases and as basic with 
these fundamental properties of elements with acids, whereas neutral oxides have no acidic 
their chemical reactivity. or basic properties.

The atomic and ionic radii, as we know, 
generally decrease in a period from left to right. Problem 3.10
As a consequence, the ionization enthalpies Show by a chemical reaction with water 
generally increase (with some exceptions as that Na2O is a basic oxide and Cl2O7 is 
outlined in section 3.7.1(a)) and electron gain an acidic oxide.
enthalpies become more negative across a solution
period. In other words, the ionization enthalpy Na2O with water forms a strong base 
of the extreme left element in a period is the whereas Cl2O7 forms strong acid.
least and the electron gain enthalpy of the Na2O + H2O → 2NaOH
element on the extreme right is the highest Cl2O7 + H2O → 2HClO4
negative	(note	:	noble	gases	having	completely	
filled shells have rather positive electron Their basic or acidic nature can be 
gain enthalpy values). This results into high qualitatively tested with litmus paper.
chemical reactivity at the two extremes and 
the lowest in the centre. Thus, the maximum Among transition metals (3d series), the 
chemical reactivity at the extreme left (among change in atomic radii is much smaller as 
alkali metals) is exhibited by the loss of an compared to those of representative elements 
electron leading to the formation of a cation across the period. The change in atomic radii 
and at the extreme right (among halogens) is still smaller among inner-transition metals 
shown by the gain of an electron forming (4f series). The ionization enthalpies are 
an anion. This property can be related with intermediate between those of s- and p-blocks. 
the reducing and oxidizing behaviour of the As a consequence, they are less electropositive 
elements which you will learn later. However, than group 1 and 2 metals.

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   94 9/9/2022   4:36:15 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 95

In a group, the increase in atomic and increases down the group and non-metallic 
ionic radii with increase in atomic number character decreases. This trend can be related 
generally results in a gradual decrease in with their reducing and oxidizing property 
ionization enthalpies and a regular decrease which you will learn later. In the case of 
(with exception in some third period elements transition elements, however, a reverse trend 
as shown in section 3.7.1(d)) in electron is observed. This can be explained in terms of 
gain enthalpies in the case of main group atomic size and ionization enthalpy.
elements. Thus, the metallic character 

sUmmary

In this Unit, you have studied the development of the Periodic law and the Periodic table. 
Mendeleev’s Periodic table was based on atomic masses. Modern Periodic table arranges 
the elements in the order of their atomic numbers in seven horizontal rows (periods) and 
eighteen vertical columns (groups or families). Atomic numbers in a period are consecutive, 
whereas in a group they increase in a pattern. Elements of the same group have similar 
valence shell	electronic	configuration	and,	therefore,	exhibit	similar	chemical	properties.	
However, the elements of the same period have incrementally increasing number of electrons 
from	left	to	right,	and,	therefore,	have	different	valencies.	Four	types	of	elements	can	be	
recognized	in	the	periodic	table	on	the	basis	of	their	electronic	configurations.	These	are	
s-block, p-block, d-block and f-block elements. Hydrogen with one electron in the 1s orbital 
occupies a unique position in the periodic table. metals comprise more than seventy eight 
per cent of the known elements. non-metals, which are located at the top of the periodic 
table, are less than twenty in number. Elements which lie at the border line between metals 
and non-metals (e.g., Si, Ge, As) are called metalloids or semi-metals. Metallic character 
increases with increasing atomic number in a group whereas decreases from left to right 
in a period. The physical and chemical properties of elements vary periodically with their 
atomic numbers.

 Periodic trends are observed in atomic sizes, ionization enthalpies, electron gain 
enthalpies, electronegativity and valence. The atomic radii decrease while going from 
left to right in a period and increase with atomic number in a group. Ionization enthalpies 
generally increase across a period and decrease down a group. Electronegativity also shows 
a similar trend. Electron gain enthalpies, in general, become more negative across a period 
and less negative down a group. There is some periodicity in valence, for example, among 
representative elements, the valence is either equal to the number of electrons in the 
outermost orbitals or eight minus this number. Chemical reactivity is highest at the two 
extremes of a period and is lowest in the centre. The reactivity on the left extreme of a period 
is because of the ease of electron loss (or low ionization enthalpy). Highly reactive elements 
do not occur in nature in free state; they usually occur in the combined form. Oxides formed 
of the elements on the left are basic and of the elements on the right are acidic in nature. 
Oxides of elements in the centre are amphoteric or neutral.

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   95 9/9/2022   4:36:15 PM



96 chemistry

EXErCisEs

3.1 What is the basic theme of organisation in the periodic table?
3.2 Which important property did Mendeleev use to classify the elements in his periodic 

table and did he stick to that?
3.3 What is the basic difference in approach between the Mendeleev’s Periodic Law and 

the Modern Periodic Law?
3.4 On the basis of quantum numbers, justify that the sixth period of the periodic table 

should have 32 elements.
3.5 In terms of period and group where would you locate the element with Z =114?
3.6 Write the atomic number of the element present in the third period and seventeenth 

group of the periodic table.
3.7 Which element do you think would have been named by
 (i) Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
 (ii) Seaborg’s group?
3.8 Why do elements in the same group have similar physical and chemical properties?
3.9 What does atomic radius and ionic radius really mean to you?
3.10 How do atomic radius vary in a period and in a group? How do you explain the 

variation?
3.11 What do you understand by isoelectronic species? Name a species that will be 

isoelectronic with each of the following atoms or ions.
	 (i)	F– (ii) Ar  (iii) Mg2+ (iv) Rb+

3.12	 Consider	the	following	species	:
 N3–, O2–,	F–, Na+, Mg2+ and Al3+

 (a) What is common in them?
 (b) Arrange them in the order of increasing ionic radii.
3.13 Explain why cation are smaller and anions larger in radii than their parent atoms?
3.14	 What	is	the	significance	of	the	terms	—	‘isolated	gaseous	atom’	and	‘ground	state’	

while	defining	the	ionization	enthalpy	and	electron	gain	enthalpy?
 Hint : Requirements for comparison purposes.
3.15 Energy of an electron in the ground state of the hydrogen atom is 

 –2.18×10–18J. Calculate the ionization enthalpy of atomic hydrogen in terms of 
J mol–1.

 Hint: Apply the idea of mole concept to derive the answer.
3.16 Among the second period elements the actual ionization enthalpies are in the order 

Li	<	B	<	Be	<	C	<	O	<	N	<	F	<	Ne.
 Explain why
 (i) Be has higher ∆ H than B

i 

 (ii) O has lower ∆ H	than	N	and	F?
i 

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   96 9/9/2022   4:36:15 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 97

3.17	 How	would	you	explain	the	fact	that	the	first	ionization	enthalpy	of	sodium	is	lower	
than that of magnesium but its second ionization enthalpy is higher than that of 
magnesium?

3.18 What are the various factors due to which the ionization enthalpy of the main group 
elements tends to decrease down a group?

3.19	 The	first	ionization	enthalpy	values	(in	kJ	mol–1)	of	group	13	elements	are	:
 B  Al Ga In Tl
 801  577 579 558 589
 How would you explain this deviation from the general trend ?
3.20 Which of the following pairs of elements would have a more negative electron gain 

enthalpy?
	 (i)	O	or	F	 (ii)	F	or	Cl
3.21 Would you expect the second electron gain enthalpy of O as positive, more negative 

or	less	negative	than	the	first?	Justify	your	answer.
3.22 What is the basic difference between the terms electron gain enthalpy and 

electronegativity?
3.23 How would you react to the statement that the electronegativity of N on Pauling 

scale is 3.0 in all the nitrogen compounds?
3.24 Describe the theory associated with the radius of an atom as it
 (a) gains an electron
 (b) loses an electron
3.25	 Would	you	expect	the	first	ionization	enthalpies	for	two	isotopes	of	the	same	element	

to be the same or different? Justify your answer.
3.26 What are the major differences between metals and non-metals?
3.27 Use the periodic table to answer the following questions.
	 (a)	 Identify	an	element	with	five	electrons	in	the	outer	subshell.
 (b) Identify an element that would tend to lose two electrons.
 (c) Identify an element that would tend to gain two electrons.
 (d) Identify the group having metal, non-metal, liquid as well as gas at the room 

 temperature.
3.28 The increasing order of reactivity among group 1 elements is Li < Na < K < Rb <Cs 

whereas	that	among	group	17	elements	is	F	>	CI	>	Br	>	I.	Explain.
3.29	 Write	the	general	outer	electronic	configuration	of	s-, p-, d- and f- block elements.
3.30 Assign the position of the element having outer electronic configuration 

(i) ns2np4 for n=3 (ii) (n-1)d2ns2 for n=4, and (iii) (n-2) f 7 (n-1)d1ns2 for n=6, in the 
periodic table.

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   97 9/9/2022   4:36:15 PM



98 chemistry

3.31	 The	first	(∆iH1) and the second (∆iH2) ionization enthalpies (in kJ mol–1) and the (∆ H) 
eg

electron gain enthalpy  (in kJ mol–1)	of	a	few	elements	are	given	below:
 Elements ∆H1      ∆H2  ∆ H

eg

 I  520      7300 –60
 II  419      3051 –48
 III  1681      3374 –328
 IV  1008      1846 –295
 V  2372      5251 +48
 VI  738      1451 –40
	 Which	of	the	above	elements	is	likely	to	be	:
 (a) the least reactive element.
 (b) the most reactive metal.
 (c) the most reactive non-metal.
 (d) the least reactive non-metal. 
 (e) the metal which can form a stable binary halide of the formula MX2(X=halogen).
 (f) the metal which can form a predominantly stable covalent halide of the formula 

 MX (X=halogen)?
3.32 Predict the formulas of the stable binary compounds that would be formed by the 

combination of the following pairs of elements.
 (a) Lithium and oxygen (b) Magnesium and nitrogen
 (c) Aluminium and iodine (d) Silicon and oxygen
	 (e)	 Phosphorus	and	fluorine	 (f)	 Element	71	and	fluorine
3.33	 In	the	modern	periodic	table,	the	period	indicates	the	value	of	:
 (a) atomic number
 (b) atomic mass
 (c) principal quantum number
 (d) azimuthal quantum number.
3.34 Which of the following statements related to the modern periodic table is incorrect?
 (a) The p-block has 6 columns, because a maximum of 6 electrons can occupy all 

 the orbitals in a p-shell.
 (b) The d-block has 8 columns, because a maximum of 8 electrons can occupy all 

 the orbitals in a d-subshell.
 (c) Each block contains a number of columns equal to the number of electrons that 

 can occupy that subshell.
 (d) The block indicates value of azimuthal quantum number (l ) for the last subshell 

	 that	received	electrons	in	building	up	the	electronic	configuration.

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   98 9/9/2022   4:36:15 PM



ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 99

3.35	 Anything	 that	 influences	 the	 valence	 electrons	will	 affect	 the	 chemistry	 of	 the	
element. Which one of the following factors does not affect the valence shell?

 (a) Valence principal quantum number (n)
 (b) Nuclear charge (Z )
 (c) Nuclear mass
 (d) Number of core electrons.
3.36	 The	size	of	isoelectronic	species	—	F–, Ne and Na+ is affected by
 (a) nuclear charge (Z )
 (b) valence principal quantum number (n)
 (c) electron-electron interaction in the outer orbitals
 (d) none of the factors because their size is the same.
3.37 Which one of the following statements is incorrect in relation to ionization enthalpy?
 (a) Ionization enthalpy increases for each successive electron.
 (b) The greatest increase in ionization enthalpy is experienced on removal of electron 

	 from	core	noble	gas	configuration.
 (c) End of valence electrons is marked by a big jump in ionization enthalpy.
 (d) Removal of electron from orbitals bearing lower n value is easier than from 

 orbital having higher n value.
3.38 Considering the elements B, Al, Mg, and K, the correct order of their metallic 

character	is	:
 (a) B > Al > Mg > K  (b)  Al > Mg > B > K
 (c) Mg > Al > K > B  (d)  K > Mg > Al > B
3.39	 Considering	the	elements	B,	C,	N,	F,	and	Si,	the	correct	order	of	their	non-metallic	

character	is	:
	 (a)	B	>	C	>	Si	>	N	>	F	 	 (b)		Si	>	C	>	B	>	N	>	F
	 (c)	F	>	N	>	C	>	B	>	Si	 	 (d)		F	>	N	>	C	>	Si	>	B
3.40	 Considering	the	elements	F,	Cl,	O	and	N,	the	correct	order	of	their	chemical	reactivity	

in	terms	of	oxidizing	property	is	:
	 (a)	F	>	Cl	>	O	>	N	 	 (b)		F	>	O	>	Cl	>	N
	 (c)	Cl	>	F	>	O	>	N	 	 (d)		O	>	F	>	N	>	Cl

2024-25

Unit 3.indd   99 9/9/2022   4:36:16 PM