Chapter 2
Theory of
Consumer Behaviour

In this chapter, we will study the behaviour of an individual
consumer. The consumer has to decide how to spend her income
on different goods1. Economists call this the problem of choice.
Most naturally, any consumer will want to get a combination of
goods that gives her maximum satisfaction. What will be this ‘best’
combination? This depends on the likes of the consumer and what
the consumer can afford to buy. The ‘likes’ of the consumer are
also called ‘preferences’. And what the consumer can afford to buy,
depends on prices of the goods and the income of the consumer.
This chapter presents two different approaches that explain
consumer behaviour (i) Cardinal Utility Analysis and (ii) Ordinal
Utility Analysis.

Preliminary Notations and Assumptions

A consumer, in general, consumes many goods; but for simplicity,
we shall consider the consumer’s choice problem in a situation
where there are only two goods2: bananas and mangoes. Any
combination of the amount of the two goods will be called a
consumption bundle or, in short, a bundle. In general, we shall
use the variable x  to denote the quantity of bananas and x to

1 2 

denote the quantity of mangoes. x  and x  can be positive or zero.
1 2

(x x ) would mean the bundle consisting of x  quantity of bananas
1, 2 1

and x  quantity of mangoes. For particular values of x  and x , (x ,
2 1 2 1

x ), would give us a particular bundle. For example, the bundle
2

(5,10) consists of 5 bananas and 10 mangoes; the bundle (10, 5)
consists of 10 bananas and 5 mangoes.

2.1 UTILITY

A consumer usually decides his demand for a commodity on the
basis of utility (or satisfaction) that he derives from it. What is
utility? Utility of a commodity is its want-satisfying capacity. The
more the need of a commodity or the stronger the desire to have it,
the greater is the utility derived from the commodity.

Utility is subjective. Different individuals can get different levels
of utility from the same commodity. For example, some one who

1We shall use the term goods to mean goods as well as services.
2The assumption that there are only two goods simplifies the analysis considerably and allows us

to understand some important concepts by using simple diagrams.

Reprint 2024-25



likes chocolates will get much higher utility from a chocolate than some one
who is not so fond of chocolates, Also, utility that one individual gets from the
commodity can change with change in place and time. For example, utility from
the use of a room heater will depend upon whether the individual is in Ladakh
or Chennai (place) or whether it is summer or winter (time).

2.1.1 Cardinal Utility Analysis

Cardinal utility analysis assumes that level of utility can be expressed in
numbers. For example, we can measure the utility derived from a shirt and say,
this shirt gives me 50 units of utility. Before discussing further, it will be useful
to have a look at two important measures of utility.

Measures of Utility

Total Utility: Total utility of a fixed quantity of a commodity (TU) is the total
satisfaction derived from consuming the given amount of some commodity x.
More of commodity x provides more satisfaction to the consumer. TU depends
on the quantity of the commodity consumed. Therefore, TU  refers to total utility

n

derived from consuming n units of a commodity x.
Marginal Utility: Marginal utility (MU) is the change in total utility due to
consumption of one additional unit of a commodity. For example, suppose 4
bananas give us 28 units of total utility and 5 bananas give us 30 units of total
utility. Clearly, consumption of the 5th banana has caused total utility to increase
by 2 units (30 units minus 28 units). Therefore,  marginal utility of the 5th banana
is 2 units.

MU  =  TU  – TU  = 30 – 28 = 2
5 5 4

In general, MU  = TU  – TU , where subscript n refers to the nth unit of the
n n n-1

commodity
Total utility and marginal utility can also be related in the following way.
TU  = MU  + MU  + … + MU  + MU

n 1 2 n-1 n

This simply means that TU derived from consuming n units of bananas is
the sum total of marginal utility of first banana (MU ), marginal utility of second 9

1

banana (MU ), and so on, till the marginal utility of the nth unit.
2

Table No. 2.1 and Figure 2.1 show an imaginary example of the values of
marginal and total utility derived from consumption of various amounts of a
commodity. Usually, it is seen that the marginal utility diminishes with increase
in consumption of the commodity. This happens because having obtained some
amount of the commodity, the desire of the consumer to have still more of it
becomes weaker. The same is also shown in the table and graph.

Table 2.1: Values of marginal and total utility derived from consumption
of various amounts of a commodity

         Units     Total Utility     Marginal Utility

1 12 12
2 18   6
3 22   4
4 24   2
5 24   0
6 22  -2

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Notice that MU  is less than
3

MU . You may also notice that
2

total utility increases but at a
diminishing rate: The rate of
change in total utility due to
change in quantity of commodity
consumed is a measure of
marginal utility. This marginal
utility diminishes with increase
in consumption of the
commodity from 12 to 6, 6 to 4

The values of marginal and total utility derived
and so on. This follows from the from consumption of various amounts of a
law of diminishing marginal commodity. The marginal utility diminishes with
utility. Law of Diminishing increase in consumption of the commodity.

Marginal Utility states that
marginal utility from consuming each additional unit of a commodity declines
as its consumption increases, while keeping consumption of other commodities
constant.

MU becomes zero at a level when TU remains constant. In the example, TU
does not change at 5th unit of consumption and therefore MU = 0. Thereafter,

5

TU starts falling and MU becomes negative.

Derivation of Demand Curve in the Case of a Single Commodity (Law of
Diminishing Marginal Utility)

Cardinal utility analysis can be used to derive demand curve for a commodity.
What is demand and what is demand curve? The quantity of a commodity that
a consumer is willing to buy and is able to afford, given prices of goods and
income of the consumer, is called demand for that commodity. Demand for a
commodity x, apart from the price of x itself, depends on factors such as prices
of other commodities (see substitutes and complements 2.4.4), income of the

10 consumer and tastes and preferences of the consumers. Demand curve is a
graphic presentation of various quantities of a commodity that a consumer is
willing to buy at different prices of the same commodity, while holding constant
prices of other related commodities
and income of the consumer.

Figure 2.2 presents hypothetical
demand curve of an individual for
commodity x at its different prices.
Quantity is measured along the
horizontal axis and price is measured
along the vertical axis.

The downward sloping demand
curve shows that at lower prices, the
individual is willing to buy more of
commodity x; at higher prices, she is
willing to buy less of commodity x. Demand curve of an individual for
Therefore, there is a negative commodity x
relationship between price of a
commodity and quantity demanded which is referred to as the Law of Demand.

An explaination for a downward sloping demand curve rests on the notion
of diminishing marginal utility. The law of diminishing marginal utility states
that each successive unit of a commodity provides lower marginal utility.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics



Therefore the individual will not be willing to pay as much for each additional
unit and this results in a downward sloping demand curve. At a price of Rs. 40
per unit x, individual’s demand for x was 5 units. The 6th unit of commodity x
will be worth less than the 5th unit. The individual will be willing to buy the 6th
unit only when the price drops below Rs. 40 per unit. Hence, the law of
diminishing marginal utility explains why demand curves have a negative slope.

2.1.2 Ordinal Utility Analysis

Cardinal utility analysis is simple to understand, but suffers from a major
drawback in the form of quantification of utility in numbers. In real life, we
never express utility in the form of numbers. At the most, we can rank various
alternative combinations in terms of having more or less utility. In other words,
the consumer does not measure utility in numbers, though she often ranks
various consumption bundles. This forms the starting point of this topic – Ordinal
Utility Analysis.

A consumer’s preferences over the set of available bundles can often be
represented diagrammatically. We
have already seen that the bundles
available to the consumer can be
plotted as points in a two- A

dimensional diagram. The points
representing bundles which give the
consumer equal utility can generally
be joined to obtain a curve like the
one in Figure 2.3. The consumer is
said to be indifferent on the different
bundles because each point of the
bundles give the consumer equal
utility.  Such a curve joining all points
representing bundles among which Indifference curve. An indifference curve joins
the consumer is indifferent is called 11

all points representing bundles which are
an indifference curve. All the points considered indifferent by the consumer.
such as A, B, C and D lying on an
indifference curve provide the consumer with the same level of satisfaction.

It is clear that when a consumer gets one more banana, he has to forego
some mangoes, so that her total utility level remains the same and she remains
on the same indifference curve. Therefore, indifference curve slopes downward.
The amount of mangoes that the consumer has to forego, in order to get an
additional banana, her total utility level being the same, is called marginal rate
of substitution (MRS). In other words, MRS is simply the rate at which the
consumer will substitute bananas for mangoes, so that her total utility remains

constant. So, MRS =| ∆Y / ∆X | 3.
One can notice that, in the table 2.2, as we increase the quantity of bananas,

the quantity of mangoes sacrificed for each additional banana declines. In other
words, MRS diminishes with increase in the number of bananas. As the number

3 | ∆Y / ∆X |= ∆Y / ∆X if (∆Y / ∆X ) ≥0

            = −∆Y / ∆X if (∆Y / ∆X ) < 0

MRS =| ∆Y / ∆X | means that MRS equals only the magnitude of the expression ∆Y / ∆X . If

∆Y / ∆X = −3 /1  it means MRS=3.

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Table 2.2: Representation of Law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution

    Combination    Quantity of bananas (Qx)  Quantity of Mangoes (Qy)     MRS

             A                                    1                                              15                              -

             B                                    2                                              12                           3:1

             C                                    3                                               10                          2:1

             D                                   4                                                 9                           1:1

of bananas with the consumer increases, the MU derived from each additional
banana falls. Similarly, with the fall in quantity of mangoes, the marginal utility
derived from mangoes increases. So, with increase in the number of bananas,
the consumer will feel the inclination to sacrifice small and smaller amounts of
mangoes. This tendency for the MRS to fall with increase in quantity of bananas
is known as Law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution. This can be
seen from figure 2.3 also. Going from point A to point B, the consumer sacrifices
3 mangoes for 1 banana, going from point B to point C, the consumer sacrifices
2 mangoes for 1 banana, and going from point C to point D, the consumer
sacrifices just 1 mango for 1 banana. Thus, it is clear that the consumer sacrifices
smaller and smaller quantities of mangoes for each additional banana.

Shape of an Indifference Curve

It may be mentioned that the law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution
causes an indifference curve to be convex to the origin. This is the most common
shape of an indifference curve. But in case of goods being perfect substitutes4,
the marginal rate of substitution does not diminish. It remains the same. Let’s
take an example.

Table 2.3: Representation of Law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution

12     Combination             Quantity of five                      Quantity of five               MRS

                                  Rupees notes (Qx)                 Rupees coins  (Qy)

             A                                    1                                               8                                 -

             B                                    2                                               7                               1:1

             C                                    3                                               6                                1:1

             D                                   4                                                5                               1:1

Here, the consumer is indifferent for all these combinations as long as the total
of five rupee coins and five rupee notes remains the same. For the consumer, it
hardly matters whether she gets a five rupee coin or a five rupee note. So,
irrespective of how many five rupee notes she has, the consumer will sacrifice
only one five rupee coin for a five rupee note. So these two commodities are
perfect substitutes for the consumer and indifference curve depicting these will
be a straight line.

In the figure.2.4, it can be seen that consumer sacrifices the same number of
five-rupee coins each time he has an additional five-rupee note.

4 Perfect Substitutes are the goods which can be used in place of each other, and provide exactly
the same level of utility to the consumer.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics



Monotonic Preferences

Consumer’s preferences are
assumed to be such that between
any two bundles (x , x ) and (y , y ),

1 2 1 2

if (x , x ) has more of at least one of
1 2

the goods and no less of the other
good compared to (y , y ), then the

1 2

consumer prefers (x , x ) to (y , y ).
1 2 1 2

Preferences of this kind are called
monotonic preferences. Thus, a
consumer’s preferences are
monotonic if and only if between Indifference Curve for perfect
any two bundles, the consumer substitutes. Indifference curve depicting two

prefers the bundle which has more commodities which are perfect substitutes is

of at least one of the goods and no a straight line.

less of the other good as compared
to the other bundle.

Indifference Map

The consumer’s preferences over all the
bundles can be represented by a family
of indifference curves as shown in Figure
2.5. This is called an indifference map of
the consumer. All points on an
indifference curve represent bundles
which are considered indifferent by the
consumer. Monotonicity of preferences Indifference Map. A family of
imply that between any two indifference indifference curves. The arrow indicates 13
curves, the bundles on the one which lies that bundles on higher indifference curves

above are preferred to the bundles on the are preferred by the consumer to the

one which lies below. bundles on lower indifference curves.

Features of Indifference Curve

1. Indifference curve slopes
downwards from left to right:
An indifference curve slopes downwards
from left to right, which means that in
order to have more of bananas, the
consumer has to forego some mangoes.
If the consumer does not forego some
mangoes with an increase in number of
bananas, it will mean consumer having
more of bananas with same number of
mangoes, taking her to a higher

Slope of the Indifference Curve. The
indifference curve. Thus, as long as the

indifference curve slopes downward. An
consumer is on the same indifference increase in the amount of bananas along the
curve, an increase in bananas must be indifference curve is associated with a
compensated by a fall in quantity of decrease in the amount of mangoes. If ∆ x

1

mangoes. > 0 then ∆ x  < 0.
2

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



2.Higher indifference curve gives greater level of utility:

As long as marginal utility of a commodity is positive, an individual will always
prefer more of that commodity, as more of the commodity will increase the level
of satisfaction.

Table 2.4: Representation of different level of utilities from different combination
of goods

          Combination                      Quantity of bananas               Quantity of Mangoes

                   A                                                  1                                                10

                   B                                                  2                                                10

                   C                                                  3                                                10

 Consider the different combination of bananas and mangoes, A, B and C
depicted in table 2.4 and figure 2.7. Combinations A, B and C consist of same
quantity of mangoes but different quantities of bananas. Since combination B
has more bananas than A, B will
provide the individual a higher
level of satisfaction than A.
Therefore, B will lie on a higher
indifference curve than A,
depicting higher satisfaction.
Likewise, C has more bananas
than B (quantity of mangoes is the
same in both B and C). Therefore,
C will provide higher level of
satisfaction than B, and also lie on
a higher indifference curve than B.

A higher indifference curve
14 consisting of combinations with Higher indifference curves give greater level

more of mangoes, or more of of utility.

bananas, or more of both, will
represent combinations that give higher level of satisfaction.

3.Two indifference curves never intersect each other:

Two indifference curves intersecting
each other will lead to conflicting
results. To explain this, let us allow
two indifference curves to intersect
each other as shown in the figure
2.8. As points A and B lie on the

A (7,10)
same indifference curve IC , utilities

1

derived from combination A and B (9,7)
IC1

combination B will give the same C (9,5)
level of satisfaction. Similarly, as Ic2

points A and C lie on the same
Bananas

indifference curve IC , utility
2

8
derived from combination A and
from combination C will give the Two indifference curves never intersect

same level of satisfaction. each other

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics

Mangoes



From this, it follows that utility from point B and from point C will also be the
same. But this is clearly an absurd result, as on point B, the consumer gets a
greater number of mangoes with the same quantity of bananas. So consumer is
better off at point B than at point C. Thus, it is clear that intersecting indifference
curves will lead to conflicting results. Thus, two indifference curves cannot
intersect each other.

2.2 THE CONSUMER’S BUDGET

Let us consider a consumer who has only a fixed amount of money (income) to
spend on two goods. The prices of the goods are given in the market. The consumer
cannot buy any and every combination of the two goods that she may want to
consume. The consumption bundles that are available to the consumer depend
on the prices of the two goods and the income of the consumer. Given her fixed
income and the prices of the two goods, the consumer can afford to buy only
those bundles which cost her less than or equal to her income.

2.2.1 Budget Set and Budget Line

Suppose the income of the consumer is M and the prices of bananas and mangoes
are p  and p respectively5. If the consumer wants to buy x  quantities of bananas,

1 2 1

she will have to spend p x  amount of money. Similarly, if the consumer wants
1 1

to buy x  quantities of mangoes, she will have to spend p x  amount of money.
2 2 2

Therefore, if the consumer wants to buy the bundle consisting of x  quantities of
1

bananas and x  quantities of mangoes, she will have to spend p x  + p x  amount
2 1 1 2 2

of money. She can buy this bundle only if she has at least p x  + p x  amount of
1 1 2 2

money. Given the prices of the goods and the income of a consumer, she can
choose any bundle as long as it costs less than or equal to the income she has.
In other words, the consumer can buy any bundle (x , x ) such that

1 2

p x  + p x  ≤ M     (2.1) 15
1 1 2 2

The inequality (2.1) is called the consumer’s budget constraint. The set of
bundles available to the consumer is called the budget set. The budget set is
thus the collection of all bundles that the consumer can buy with her income at
the prevailing market prices.

EXAMPLE  2.1

Consider, for example, a consumer who has Rs 20, and suppose, both the goods
are priced at Rs 5 and are available only in integral units. The bundles that this
consumer can afford to buy are: (0, 0), (0, 1), (0, 2), (0, 3), (0, 4), (1, 0), (1, 1),
(1, 2), (1, 3), (2, 0), (2, 1), (2, 2), (3, 0), (3, 1) and (4, 0). Among these bundles,
(0, 4), (1,3), (2, 2), (3, 1) and (4, 0) cost exactly Rs 20 and all the other bundles
cost less than Rs 20. The consumer cannot afford to buy bundles like (3, 3) and
(4, 5) because they cost more than Rs 20 at the prevailing prices.

5 Price of a good is the amount of money that the consumer has to pay per unit of the good she
wants to buy. If rupee is the unit of money and quantity of the good is measured in kilograms, the
price of banana being p means the consumer has to pay p rupees per kilograms of banana that she

1 1 

wants to buy.

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



If both the goods are perfectly
divisible6, the consumer’s budget set
would consist of all bundles (x , x )

1 2

such that x  and x  are any numbers
1 2

greater than or equal to 0 and p x  +
1 1

p x  ≤ M. The budget set can be
2 2

represented in a diagram as in Figure
2.9.

All bundles in the positive
quadrant which are on or below the
line are included in the budget set.
The equation of the line is Budget Set. Quantity of bananas is measured

p x  + p x  = M (2.2) along the horizontal axis and quantity of mangoes
1 1 2 2

is measured along the vertical axis. Any point in
The line consists of all bundles which the diagram represents a bundle of the two
cost exactly equal to M. This line is goods. The budget set consists of all points on

called the budget line. Points below or below the straight line having the equation

the budget line represent bundles p x  + p x  = M.
1 1 2 2

which cost strictly less than M.
The equation (2.2) can also be written as7

M p
x = − 1

2 x (2.3)
p p 1

2 2
M

The budget line is a straight line with horizontal intercept p  and vertical
1

M
intercept p . The horizontal intercept represents the bundle that the consumer

2

can buy if she spends her entire income on bananas. Similarly, the vertical
intercept represents the bundle that the consumer can buy if she spends her

p
entire income on mangoes. The slope of the budget line is –

1

p .
16 2

Price Ratio and the Slope of the Budget Line

Think of any point on the budget line. Such a point represents a bundle which
costs the consumer her entire budget. Now suppose the consumer wants to
have one more banana. She can do it only if she gives up some amount of the
other good. How many mangoes does she have to give up if she wants to have an
extra quantity of bananas? It would depend on the prices of the two goods. A
quantity of banana costs p . Therefore, she will have to reduce her expenditure

1

on mangoes by p  amount, if she wants one more quantity of banana. With p ,
1 1

p1
she could buy p  quantities of mangoes. Therefore, if the consumer wants to

2

have an extra quantity of bananas when she is spending all her money, she will

p1
have to give up p quantities of mangoes. In other words, in the given market

2

6The goods considered in Example 2.1 were not divisible and were available only in integer units.
There are many goods which are divisible in the sense that they are available in non-integer units
also. It is not possible to buy half an orange or one-fourth of a banana, but it is certainly possible to
buy half a kilogram of rice or one-fourth of a litre of milk.

7In school mathematics, you have learnt the equation of a straight line as y = c + mx where c is the
vertical intercept and m is the  slope of the straight line. Note that equation (2.3) has the same form.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics



Derivation of the Slope of the
Budget Line Mangoes

The slope of the budget line
measures the amount of change in
mangoes required per unit of
change in bananas along the
budget line. Consider any two
points (x , x ) and (x  + ∆x , x  + ∆x )

1 2 1 1 2 2

on the budget line.a
Bananas

It must be the case that

p x  + p x  = M (2.4)
1 1 2 2

and, p (x  + ∆x ) + p (x  + ∆x ) = M          (2.5)
1 1 1 2 2 2

Subtracting (2.4) from (2.5), we obtain

p ∆x  + p ∆x  = 0 (2.6)
1 1 2 2

By rearranging terms in (2.6), we obtain
∆x2 p

= − 1

∆ (2.7)
x1 p2

a∆ (delta) is a Greek letter. In mathematics, ∆ is sometimes used to denote ‘a change’.
Thus, ∆x  stands for a change in x  and ∆x  stands for a change in x .

1 1 2 2

p1
conditions, the consumer can substitute bananas for mangoes at the rate p .

2

The absolute value8 of the slope of the budget line measures the rate at which
the consumer is able to substitute bananas for mangoes when she spends her 17
entire budget.

2.2.2 Changes in the Budget Set

The set of available bundles depends on the prices of the two goods and the income
of the consumer. When the price of either of the goods or the consumer’s income
changes, the set of available bundles is also likely to change. Suppose the
consumer’s income changes from M to M ′ but the prices of the two goods remain
unchanged. With the new income, the consumer can afford to buy all bundles
(x , x ) such that p x  + p x  ≤ M ′. Now the equation of the budget line is

1 2 1 1 2 2

p x  + p x  = M ′ (2.8)
1 1 2 2

Equation (2.8) can also be written as

M' p
x = – 1

2 x
p p 1 (2.9)

2 2

Note that the slope of the new budget line is the same as the slope of the
budget line prior to the change in the consumer’s income. However, the vertical
intercept has changed after the change in income. If there is an increase in the

8The absolute value of a number x is equal to x if x ≥ 0 and is equal to – x if x < 0. The absolute
value of x is usually denoted by |x|.

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



income, i.e. if M' > M, the vertical as well as horizontal intercepts increase, there
is a parallel outward shift of the budget line. If the income increases, the
consumer can buy more of the goods at the prevailing market prices. Similarly,
if the income goes down, i.e. if M' < M, both intercepts decrease, and hence, there
is a parallel inward shift of the budget line. If income goes down, the availability
of goods goes down. Changes in the set of available bundles resulting from
changes in consumer’s income when the prices of the two goods remain
unchanged are shown in Figure 2.10.

Mangoes Mangoes

M'<M M'>M

Bananas Bananas

10

Changes in the Set of Available Bundles of Goods Resulting from Changes in the
Consumer’s Income. A decrease in income causes a parallel inward shift of the budget
line as in panel (a). An increase in income causes a parallel outward shift of the budget line
as in panel (b).

Now suppose the price of bananas change from p  to p'  but the price of
1 1

mangoes and the consumer’s income remain unchanged. At the new price of
bananas, the consumer can afford to buy all bundles (x ,x ) such that p' x  +

1 2 1 1
p x  ≤ M. The equation of the budget line is

18 2 2

p' x  + p x  = M (2.10)
1 1 2 2

Equation (2.10) can also be written as

M p'
x 1

2 = – x
p p 1 (2.11)

2 2

Note that the vertical intercept of the new budget line is the same as the
vertical intercept of the budget line prior to the change in the price of bananas.
However, the slope of the budget line and horizontal intercept have changed
after the price change. If the price of bananas increases, ie if p' > p , the absolute

1 1

value of the slope of the budget line increases, and the budget line becomes
steeper (it pivots inwards around the vertical intercept and horizontal intercept
decreases). If the price of bananas decreases, i.e., p' < p , the absolute value of

1 1

the slope of the budget line decreases and hence, the budget line becomes
flatter (it pivots outwards around the vertical intercept and horizontal intercept
increases). Figure 2.11 shows change in the budget set when the price of only one
commodity changes while the price of the other commodity as well as income of
the consumer are constant.

A change in price of mangoes, when price of bananas and the consumer’s
income remain unchanged, will bring about similar changes in the budget set of
the consumer.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics



Mangoes Mangoes

Bananas
Bananas

11

Changes in the Set of Available Bundles of Goods Resulting from Changes in the
Price of bananas. An increase in the price of bananas makes the budget line steeper as in
panel (a). A decrease in the price of bananas makes the budget line flatter as in panel (b).

2.3 OPTIMAL CHOICE OF THE CONSUMER

The budget set consists of all bundles that are available to the consumer. The
consumer can choose her consumption bundle from the budget set. But on
what basis does she choose her consumption bundle from the ones that are
available to her? In economics, it is assumed that the consumer chooses her
consumption bundle on the basis of her  tatse and preferences over  the bundles
in the budget set. It is generally assumed that the consumer has well defined
preferences over the set of all possible bundles. She can compare any two
bundles. In other words, between any two bundles, she either prefers one to the
other or she is indifferent between the two.

Equality of the Marginal Rate of Substitution and the Ratio of 19
the Prices

The optimum bundle of the consumer is located at the point where the
budget line is tangent to one of the indifference curves. If the budget line
is tangent to an indifference curve at a point, the absolute value of the
slope of the indifference curve (MRS) and that of the budget line (price
ratio) are same at that point. Recall from our earlier discussion that the
slope of the indifference curve is the rate at which the consumer is willing
to substitute one good for the other. The slope of the budget line is the
rate at which the consumer is able to substitute one good for the other
in the market. At the optimum, the two rates should be the same. To see
why, consider a point where this is not so. Suppose the MRS at such a
point is 2 and suppose the two goods have the same price. At this point,
the consumer is willing to give up 2 mangoes if she is given an extra
banana. But in the market, she can buy an extra banana if she gives up
just 1 mango. Therefore, if she buys an extra banana, she can have more
of both the goods compared to the bundle represented by the point, and
hence, move to a preferred bundle. Thus, a point at which the MRS is
greater, the price ratio cannot be the optimum. A similar argument holds
for any point at which the MRS is less than the price ratio.

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



In economics, it is generally assumed that the consumer is a rational
individual. A rational individual clearly knows what is good or what is bad for
her, and in any given situation, she always tries to achieve the best for herself.
Thus, not only does a consumer have well-defined preferences over the set of
available bundles, she also acts according to her preferences. From the bundles
which are available to her, a rational consumer always chooses the one which
gives her maximum satisfaction.

In the earlier sections, it was observed that the budget set describes the
bundles that are available to the consumer and her preferences over the available
bundles can usually be represented by an indifference map. Therefore, the
consumer’s problem can also be stated as follows: The rational consumer’s
problem is to move to a point on the highest possible indifference curve given
her budget set.

If such a point exists, where would it be located? The optimum point would
be located on the budget line. A point below the budget line cannot be the
optimum. Compared to a point below the budget line, there is always some
point on the budget line which contains more of at least one of the goods and
no less of the other, and is, therefore, preferred by a consumer whose preferences
are monotonic. Therefore, if the consumer’s preferences are monotonic, for any
point below the budget line, there is some point on the budget line which is
preferred by the consumer. Points above the budget line are not available to
the consumer. Therefore, the optimum (most preferred) bundle of the consumer
would be on the budget line.

Where on the budget line will the optimum bundle be located? The point at
which the budget line just touches (is tangent to), one of the indifference curves
would be the optimum.9 To see why this is so, note that any point on the budget
line other than the point at which it touches the indifference curve lies on a
lower indifference curve and hence is inferior. Therefore, such a point cannot be
the consumer’s optimum. The optimum bundle is located on the budget line at

20 the point where the budget line is tangent to an indifference curve.
Figure 2.12 illustrates the

consumer’s optimum. At (x *, x *
1 2 ) , the

budget line is tangent to the black
coloured indifference curve. The first
thing to note is that the indifference
curve just touching the budget line
is the highest possible indifference
curve given the consumer’s budget
set. Bundles on the indifference
curves above this, like the grey one,
are not affordable. Points on the
indifference curves below this, like the Consumer’s Optimum. The point (x ∗, x ∗ ), at

1 2

blue one, are certainly inferior to the which the budget line is tangent to an
indifference curve represents the consumers

points on the indifference curve, just
touching the budget line. Any other
point on the budget line lies on a lower indifference curve and hence, is inferior
to (x *, x * ) . Therefore, (x *, *

1 x2 )  is the consumer’s optimum bundle.
1 2

9 To be more precise, if the situation is as depicted in Figure 2.12 then the optimum would be
located at the point where the budget line is tangent to one of the indifference curves. However,
there are other situations in which the optimum is at a point where the consumer spends her entire
income on one of the goods only.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics



2.4 DEMAND

In the previous section, we studied the choice problem of the consumer and
derived the consumer’s optimum bundle given the prices of the goods, the
consumer’s income and her preferences. It was observed that the amount of a
good that the consumer chooses optimally, depends on the price of the good
itself, the prices of other goods, the consumer’s income and her tastes and
preferences. The quantity of a commodity that a consumer is willing to buy and
is able to afford, given prices of goods and consumer’s tastes and preferences is
called demand for the commodity. Whenever one or more of these variables
change, the quantity of the good chosen
by the consumer is likely to change as
well. Here we shall change one of these
variables at a time and study how the
amount of the good chosen by the
consumer is related to that variable.

2.4.1 Demand Curve and the Law of
Demand

If the prices of other goods, the
consumer’s income and her tastes and
preferences remain unchanged, the
amount of a good that the consumer Demand Curve. The demand curve is a

relation between the quantity of the good
optimally chooses, becomes entirely

chosen by a consumer and the price of the
dependent on its price. The relation good. The independent variable (price) is
between the consumer’s optimal choice measured along the vertical axis and
of the quantity of a good and its price is dependent variable (quantity) is measured

very important and this relation is called along the horizontal axis. The demand curve

the demand function. Thus, the gives the quantity demanded by the
consumer at each price.

consumer’s demand function for a good
21

Functions

Consider any two variables x and y. A function

y = f (x)

is a relation between the two variables x and y such that for each value of x,
there is an unique value of the variable y. In other words, f (x) is a rule
which assigns an unique value y for each value of x. As the value of y
depends on the value of x, y is called the dependent variable and x is called
the independent variable.

EXAMPLE  1

Consider, for example, a situation where x can take the values 0, 1, 2, 3 and
suppose corresponding values of y are 10, 15, 18 and 20, respectively.
Here y and x are related by the function y = f (x) which is defined as follows:
f (0) = 10; f (1) = 15; f (2) = 18 and f (3) = 20.

EXAMPLE  2

Consider another situation where x can take the values 0, 5, 10 and 20.
And suppose corresponding values of y are 100, 90, 70 and 40, respectively.

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Here, y and x are related by the function y = f (x ) which is defined as follows:
f (0) = 100; f (10) = 90; f (15) = 70 and f (20) = 40.

Very often a functional relation between the two variables can be expressed
in algebraic form like

y = 5 + x and y = 50 – x

A function y = f (x) is an increasing function if the value of y does not
decrease with increase in the value of x. It is a decreasing function if the
value of y does not increase with increase in the value of x. The function in
Example 1 is an increasing function. So is the function y = x + 5. The function
in Example 2 is a decreasing function. The function y = 50 – x is also
decreasing.

Graphical Representation of a Function

A graph of a function y = f (x) is a diagrammatic representation of
the function. Following are the graphs of the functions in the examples
given above.

22

Usually, in a graph, the independent variable is measured along the
horizontal axis and the dependent variable is measured along the vertical
axis. However, in economics, often the opposite is done. The demand curve,
for example, is drawn by taking the independent variable (price) along the
vertical axis and the dependent variable (quantity) along the horizontal axis.
The graph of an increasing function is upward sloping or and the graph of a
decreasing function is downward sloping. As we can see from the diagrams
above, the graph of y = 5 + x is upward sloping and that of y = 50 – x, is
downward sloping.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics



gives the amount of the good that the consumer chooses at different levels of its
price when the other things remain unchanged. The consumer’s demand for a
good as a function of its price can be written as

X = f (P) (2.12)
where X denotes the quantity and P denotes the price of the good.

The demand function can also be represented graphically as in Figure 2.13.
The graphical representation of the demand function is called the demand curve.
The relation between the consumer’s demand for a good and the price of the
good is likely to be negative in general. In other words, the amount of a good
that a consumer would optimally choose is likely to increase when the price of
the good falls and it is likely to decrease with a rise in the price of the good.

2.4.2 Deriving a Demand Curve from Indifference Curves and Budget
Constraints

Consider an individual consuming bananas (X )and mangoes (X ), whose income
1 2

is M and market prices of X and X  are 
1 2 P ' and P '
 1 2 respectively. Figure (a) depicts

her consumption equilibrium at point C, where she buys X '1 and X '2 quantities
of bananas and mangoes respectively. In panel (b) of figure 2.14, we plot P '1
against X '1  which is the first point on the demand curve for X .

1

23

Deriving a demand curve from indifference curves and budget constraints

Suppose the price of X  drops to P  with P '
1 2 and M remaining constant. The

1  
budget set in panel (a), expands and new consumption equilibrium is on a
higher indifference curve at point D, where she buys more of bananas ( X1 > X ' ).

1

Thus, demand for bananas increases as its price drops. We plot P  against 
1 X1

in panel (b) of figure 2.14 to get the second point on the demand curve for X .
∧ 1

Likewise the price of bananas can be dropped further to P1 , resulting in further
∧ ∧ ∧

increase in consumption of bananas to X1 . P1  plotted against X1  gives us the
third point on the demand curve. Therefore, we observe that a drop in price of
bananas results in an increase in quality of bananas purchased by an individual
who maximises his utility. The demand curve for bananas is thus negatively
sloped.

The negative slope of the demand curve can also be explained in terms of the
two effects namely, substitution effect and income effect that come into play
when price of a commodity changes. When bananas become cheaper, the
consumer maximises his utility by substituting bananas for mangoes in order
to derive the same level of satisfaction of a price change, resulting in an increase
in demand for bananas.

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Moreover, as price of bananas drops, consumer’s purchasing power increases,
which further increases demand for bananas (and mangoes). This is the income
effect of a price change, resulting in further increase in demand for bananas.

Law of Demand: Law of Demand states that other things being equal,
there is a negative relation between demand for a commodity and its price. In
other words, when price of the commodity increases, demand for it falls and
when price of the commodity decreases, demand for it rises, other factors
remaining the same.

Linear Demand

A linear demand curve can be written
as

a
d(p) = a – bp; 0 ≤  p ≤ b

a
 = 0; p >                (2.13)

b
where a is the vertical intercept, –b is
the slope of the demand curve. At
price 0, the demand is a, and at price

a Linear Demand Curve. The diagram depicts
equal to , the demand is 0. The

b the linear demand curve given by equation 2.13.
slope of the demand curve measures
the rate at which demand changes with respect to its price. For a unit increase
in the price of the good, the demand falls by b units. Figure 2.15 depicts a linear
demand curve.

2.4.3 Normal and Inferior Goods

The demand function is a relation between the consumer’s demand for a
good and its price when other things are given. Instead of studying the relation

24 between the demand for a good and its price, we can also study the relation
between the consumer’s demand for the good and the income of the consumer.
The quantity of a good that the
consumer demands can increase or A rise in the purchasing power
decrease with the rise in income (income) of the consumer can
depending on the nature of the good. sometimes induce the consumer to

For most goods, the quantity that a reduce the consumption of a good.

consumer chooses, increases as the In such a case, the substitution
effect and the income effect will work

consumer’s income increases and
in opposite directions. The demand

decreases as the consumer’s income for such a good can be inversely or
decreases. Such goods are called positively related to its price
normal goods. Thus, a consumer’s depending on the relative strengths
demand for a normal good moves in the of these two opposing effects. If the
same direction as the income of the substitution effect is stronger than
consumer. However, there are some the income effect, the demand for the

goods the demands for which move in good and the price of the good would

the opposite direction of the income of still be inversely related. However,
if the income effect is stronger than

the consumer. Such goods are called
the substitution effect, the demand

inferior goods. As the income of the
for the good would be positively

consumer increases, the demand for an related to its price. Such a good is
inferior good falls, and as the income called a Giffen good.
decreases, the demand for an inferior

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics



good rises. Examples of inferior goods include low quality food items like
coarse cereals.

A good can be a normal good for the consumer at some levels of income and
an inferior good for her at other levels of income. At very low levels of income, a
consumer’s demand for low quality cereals can increase with income. But, beyond
a level, any increase in income of the consumer is likely to reduce her
consumption of such food items as she switches to better quality cereals.

2.4.4 Substitutes and Complements

We can also study the relation between the quantity of a good that a consumer
chooses and the price of a related good. The quantity of a good that the
consumer chooses can increase or decrease with the rise in the price of a
related good depending on whether the two goods are substitutes or
complementary to each other. Goods which are consumed together are called
complementary goods. Examples of goods which are complement to each
other include tea and sugar, shoes and socks, pen and ink, etc. Since tea
and sugar are used together, an increase in the price of sugar is likely to
decrease the demand for tea and a decrease in the price of sugar is likely to
increase the demand for tea. Similar is the case with other complements. In
general, the demand for a good moves in the opposite direction of the price of
its complementary goods.

In contrast to complements, goods like tea and coffee are not consumed
together. In fact, they are substitutes for each other. Since tea is a substitute for
coffee, if the price of coffee increases, the consumers can shift to tea, and hence,
the consumption of tea is likely to go up. On the other hand, if the price of coffee
decreases, the consumption of tea is likely to go down. The demand for a good
usually moves in the direction of the price of its substitutes.

2.4.5 Shifts in the Demand Curve

The demand curve was drawn under the assumption that the consumer’s
income, the prices of other goods and the preferences of the consumer are given. 25

What happens to the demand curve when any of these things changes?
Given the prices of other goods and the preferences of a consumer, if the

income increases, the demand for the good at each price changes, and hence,
there is a shift in the demand curve. For normal goods, the demand curve shifts
rightward and for inferior goods, the demand curve shifts leftward.

Given the consumer’s income and her preferences, if the price of a related
good changes, the demand for a good at each level of its price changes, and
hence, there is a shift in the demand curve. If there is an increase in the price of
a substitute good, the demand curve shifts rightward. On the other hand, if
there is an increase in the price of a complementary good, the demand curve
shifts leftward.

The demand curve can also shift due to a change in the tastes and preferences
of the consumer. If the consumer’s preferences change in favour of a good, the
demand curve for such a good shifts rightward. On the other hand, the demand
curve shifts leftward due to an unfavourable change in the preferences of the
consumer. The demand curve for ice-creams, for example, is likely to shift
rightward in the summer because of preference for ice-creams goes up in
summer. Revelation of the fact that cold-drinks might be injurious to health can
adversely affect preferences for cold-drinks. This is likely to result in a leftward
shift in the demand curve for cold-drinks.

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Shifts in Demand. The demand curve in panel (a) shifts leftward and that in panel
(b) shifts rightward.

Shifts in the demand curve are depicted in Figure 2.16. It may be mentioned
that shift in demand curve takes place when there is a change in some factor,
other than the price of the commodity.

2.4.6 Movements along the Demand Curve and Shifts in the
Demand Curve

As it has been noted earlier, the amount of a good that the consumer chooses
depends on the price of the good, the prices of other goods, income of the
consumer and her tastes and preferences. The demand function is a relation
between the amount of the good and its price when other things remain
unchanged. The demand curve is a graphical representation of the demand
function. At higher prices, the demand is less, and at lower prices, the demand
is more. Thus, any change in the price leads to movements along the demand
curve. On the other hand, changes in any of the other things lead to a shift in

26 the demand curve. Figure 2.17 illustrates a movement along the demand
curve and a shift in the demand curve.

Movement along a Demand Curve and Shift of a Demand Curve. Panel (a) depicts a
movement along the demand curve and panel (b) depicts a shift of the demand curve.

2.5 MARKET DEMAND

In the last section, we studied the choice problem of the individual consumer
and derived the demand curve of the consumer. However, in the market for a

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics



good, there are many consumers. It is important to find out the market demand
for the good. The market demand for a good at a particular price is the total
demand of all consumers taken together. The market demand for a good can be
derived from the individual demand curves. Suppose there are only two

Derivation of the Market Demand Curve. The market demand curve can be derived as
a horizontal summation of the individual demand curves.

consumers in the market for a good. Suppose at price p′, the demand of consumer
1 is q ′ and that of consumer 2 is q ′ . Then, the market demand of the good at p′

1 2

is q ′ + q ′ . Similarly, at price p̂ , if the demand of consumer 1 is q̂
2 1  and that of

1

consumer 2 is q̂2 , the market demand of the good at p̂  is qˆ1 + qˆ 2 . Thus, the
market demand for the good at each price can be derived by adding up the
demands of the two consumers at that price. If there are more than two consumers
in the market for a good, the market demand can be derived similarly.

The market demand curve of a good can also be derived from the individual
demand curves graphically by adding up the individual demand curves
horizontally as shown in Figure 2.18. This method of adding two curves is called
horizontal summation. 27

Adding up Two Linear Demand Curves

Consider, for example, a market where there are two consumers and the demand
curves of the two consumers are given as

d (p) = 10 – p (2.14)
1

and d (p) = 15 – p (2.15)
2

Furthermore, at any price greater than 10, the consumer 1 demands 0 unit of
the good, and similarly, at any price greater than 15, the consumer 2 demands 0
unit of the good. The market demand can be derived by adding equations (2.14)
and (2.15). At any price less than or equal to 10, the market demand is given by
25 – 2p, for any price greater than 10, and less than or equal to 15, market
demand is 15 – p, and at any price greater than 15, the market demand is 0.

2.6 ELASTICITY OF DEMAND

The demand for a good moves in the opposite direction of its price. But the
impact of the price change is always not the same. Sometimes, the demand for a
good changes considerably even for small price changes. On the other hand,
there are some goods for which the demand is not affected much by price changes.

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Demands for some goods are very responsive to price changes while demands
for certain others are not so responsive to price changes. Price elasticity of demand
is a measure of the responsiveness of the demand for a good to changes in its
price. Price elasticity of demand for a good is defined as the percentage change
in demand for the good divided by the percentage change in its price. Price-
elasticity of demand for a good

percentage change in demand for the good
e  = 

D percentage change in the price of the good (2.16a)

∆Q
×100

= Q
∆P ×100
P (2.16b)

=  ∆Q  ×  P 
   ∆ 
 Q   P 

Where, ∆P  is the change in price of the good and ∆Q is the change in quantity
of the good.

EXAMPLE  2.2

Suppose an individual buy 15 bananas when its price is Rs. 5 per banana. when
the price increases to Rs. 7 per banana, she reduces his demand to 12 bananas.

Price Per banana (Rs.) : P     Quantity of bananas demanded : Q
Old Price : P  = 5 Old quantity : Q  = 15

1 1

New Price : P  = 7 New quantity: Q  = 12
2 2

In order to find her elasticity demand for bananas, we find the percentage change
in quantity demanded and its price, using the information summarized in table.

28
Note that the price elasticity of demand is a negative number since the demand

for a good is negatively related to the price of a good. However, for simplicity, we
will always refer to the absolute value of the elasticity.

∆Q
Percentage change in quantity demanded = ×100

Q1

 Q − 
2 Q1

     =   ×100
 Q1 

12 −15
     = ×100 = − 20

15

∆P
Percentage change in Market price = ×100

P1

 P2 − P 
1

      =   ×100
 P1 

7 − 5
      = ×100 = 40

5

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics



Therefore, in our example, as price of bananas increases by 40 percent,
20

demand for bananas drops by 20 percent. Price elasticity of demand eD = = 0.5 .
40

Clearly, the demand for bananas is not very responsive to a change in price of
bananas. When the percentage change in quantity demanded is less than the
percentage change in market price, eD  is estimated to be less than one and the
demand for the good is said to be inelastic at that price. Demand for essential
goods is often found to be inelastic.

When the percentage change in quantity demanded is more than the
percentage change in market price, the demand is said to be highly responsive

to changes in market price and the estimated eD  is more than one. The demand
for the good is said to be elastic at that price. Demand for luxury goods is seen

to be highly responsive to changes in their market prices and eD >1.
When the percentage change in quantity demanded equals the percentage

change in its market price, eD  is estimated to be equal to one and the demand
for the good is said to be Unitary-elastic at that price. Note that the demand for
certain goods may be elastic, unitary elastic and inelastic at different prices. In
fact, in the next section, elasticity along a linear demand curve is estimated at
different prices and shown to vary at each point on a downward sloping demand
curve.

2.6.1 Elasticity along a Linear Demand Curve

Let us consider a linear demand curve q = a – bp. Note that at any point on the

∆q
demand curve, the change in demand per unit change in the price ∆p  = –b.

∆q
Substituting the value of ∆p  in (2.16b),

29
p

we obtain,  e  = – b
D q

puting the value of q,

bp
       e = –                        (2.17)

D a – bp

From (2.17), it is clear that the
elasticity of demand is different at
different points on a linear demand
curve. At p = 0, the elasticity is 0, at q = Elasticity along a Linear Demand

a Curve. Price elasticity of demand is different
0, elasticity is ∞. At p = , the elasticity

2b at different points on the linear demand
curve.

is 1, at any price greater than 0 and less

a a
than , elasticity is less than 1, and at any price greater than , elasticity is

2b 2b
greater than 1. The price elasticities of demand along the linear demand curve
given by equation (2.17) are depicted in Figure 2.19.

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Geometric Measure of Elasticity along a Linear Demand Curve

The elasticity of a linear demand
curve can easily be measured
geometrically. The elasticity of
demand at any point on a straight
line demand curve is given by the
ratio of the lower segment and the
upper segment of the demand curve
at that point. To see why this is the
case, consider the following figure
which depicts a straight line
demand curve, q = a – bp.

Suppose at price p0, the
demand for the good is q0. Now
consider a small change in the price. The new price is p1, and at that price,
demand for the good is q1.

∆q = q1q0 = CD and ∆p = p1p0 = CE.

∆ 1
q p0 q q0

q/q0 ∆ Op0
CD Op0

Therefore, e  =  = 
D ∆p/p0 ∆  ×  = 

p q0 1 0  × 0  =  × 
p p Oq CE Oq0

0
CD p D p0 o

D Oq
Since ECD and Bp0D are similar triangles,  = . But

CE p0   = o
B p0B p B

op0 q0D
e =  = .

D 
P 0B P 0B

q0D DA
Since, Bp0D and BOA are similar triangles,   

p0 =
B DB

DA
Thus, e  = .

D DB

30 The elasticity of demand at different points on a straight line demand
curve can be derived by this method. Elasticity is 0 at the point where the
demand curve meets the horizontal axis and it is ∝ at the point where the
demand curve meets the vertical axis. At the midpoint of the demand curve,
the elasticity is 1, at any point to the left of the midpoint, it is greater than 1
and at any point to the right, it is less than 1.

Note that along the horizontal axis p = 0, along the vertical axis q = 0 and
a

at the midpoint of the demand curve p = .
2b

Constant Elasticity Demand Curve

The elasticity of demand on different points on a linear demand curve is different
varying from 0 to ∞. But sometimes, the demand curves can be such that the
elasticity of demand remains constant throughout. Consider, for example, a
vertical demand curve as the one depicted in Figure 2.20(a). Whatever be the

price, the demand is given at the level q   . A price never leads to a change in the
demand for such a demand curve and |e | is always 0. Therefore, a vertical

D

demand curve is perfectly inelastic.
Figure 2.20 (b) depics a horizontal demand curve, where market price

remains constant at P , whatever be the level of demand for the commodity. At
any other price, quantity demanded drops to zero and therefore ed = ∞ . A
horizontal demand curve is perfectly elastic.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics



Constant Elasticity Demand Curves. Elasticity of demand at all points along the vertical
demand curve, as shown in panel (a), is 0. Elasticity of demand at all point along the
horizontal demand curve, as shown in panel (b) is ∞ . Elasticity at all points on the demand
curve in panel (c) is 1.

Figure 2.20(c) depicts a demand curve which has the shape of a rectangular
hyperbola. This demand curve has a property that a percentage change in price
along the demand curve always leads to equal percentage change in quantity.
Therefore, |e | = 1 at every point on this demand curve. This demand curve is

D

called the unitary elastic demand curve.

2.6.2 Factors Determining Price Elasticity of Demand for a Good

The price elasticity of demand for a good depends on the nature of the good and
the availability of close substitutes of the good. Consider, for example, necessities
like food. Such goods are essential for life and the demands for such goods do
not change much in response to changes in their prices. Demand for food does
not change much even if food prices go up. On the other hand, demand for
luxuries can be very responsive to price changes. In general, demand for a
necessity is likely to be price inelastic while demand for a luxury good is likely 31
to be price elastic.

Though demand for food is inelastic, the demands for specific food items are
likely to be more elastic. For example, think of a particular variety of pulses. If the
price of this variety of pulses goes up, people can shift to some other variety of
pulses which is a close substitute. The demand for a good is likely to be elastic if
close substitutes are easily available. On the other hand, if close substitutes are
not available easily, the demand for a good is likely to be inelastic.

2.6.3 Elasticity and Expenditure

The expenditure on a good is equal to the demand for the good times its price.
Often it is important to know how the expenditure on a good changes as a result
of a price change. The price of a good and the demand for the good are inversely
related to each other. Whether the expenditure on the good goes up or down as
a result of an increase in its price depends on how responsive the demand for
the good is to the price change.

Consider an increase in the price of a good. If the percentage decline in
quantity is greater than the percentage increase in the price, the expenditure on
the good will go down. For example, see row 2 in table 2.5 which shows that as
price of a commodity increases by 10%, its demand drops by 12%, resulting in
a decline in expenditure on the good. On the other hand, if the percentage decline
in quantity is less than the percentage increase in the price, the expenditure on

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



the good will go up (See row 1 in table 2.5). And if the percentage decline in
quantity is equal to the percentage increase in the price, the expenditure on the
good will remain unchanged (see row 3 in table 2.5).

Now consider a decline in the price of the good. If the percentage increase in
quantity is greater than the percentage decline in the price, the expenditure on
the good will go up(see row 4 in table 2.5). On the other hand, if the percentage
increase in quantity is less than the percentage decline in the price, the expenditure
on the good will go down(see row 5 in table 2.5). And if the percentage increase
in quantity is equal to the percentage decline in the price, the expenditure on
the good will remain unchanged (see row 6 in table 2.5).

The expenditure on the good would change in the opposite direction as the
price change if and only if the percentage change in quantity is greater than the
percentage change in price, ie if the good is price-elastic (see rows 2 and 4 in
table 2.5). The expenditure on the good would change in the same direction as
the price change if and only if the percentage change in quantity is less than the
percentage change in price, i.e., if the good is price inelastic (see rows 1 and 5 in
table 2.5). The expenditure on the good would remain unchanged if and only if
the percentage change in quantity is equal to the percentage change in price,
i.e., if the good is unit-elastic (see rows 3 and 6 in table 2.5).

Table 2.5: For hypothetic cases of price rise and drop, the following table
summarises the relationship between elasticity and change in expenditure
of a commodity

Change   Change in     % Change   % Change       Impact on     Nature of price
in Price   Quantity      in price     in quantity Expenditure     Elasticity of
    (P)      demand (Q)   demand                              = P×Q           demand ed

1        ↑               ↓                 +10              -8                   ↑            Price Inelastic

2        ↑               ↓                 +10            -12                  ↓              Price Elastic

3        ↑               ↓                 +10            -10           No Change      Unit Elastic
32

4        ↓               ↑                 -10             +15                 ↑              Price Elastic

5         ↓                  ↑                    -10                 +7                    ↓              Price Inelastic

6        ↓               ↑                  -10             +10         No Change     Unit Elastic

Rectangular Hyperbola

An equation of the form

xy = c

where x and y are two variables and c is a
constant, giving us a curve called
rectangular hyperbola. It is a downward
sloping curve in the x-y plane as shown
in the diagram. For any two points p and q
on the curve, the areas of the two
rectangles Oy px and Oy qx are same and

1 1 2 2 

equal to c.
If the equation of a demand curve

takes the form pq = e, where e is a constant, it will be a rectangular
hyperbola, where price (p) times quantity (q) is a constant. With such a
demand curve, no matter at what point the consumer consumes, her
expenditures are always the same and equal to e.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics



Relationship between Elasticity and change in Expenditure on a Good

Suppose at price p, the demand for a good is q, and at price p + ∆p, the
demand for the good is q + ∆q.

At price p, the total expenditure on the good is pq, and at price p + ∆p,
the total expenditure on the good is (p + ∆p)(q + ∆q).

If price changes from p to (p + ∆p), the change in the expenditure on the
good is, (p + ∆p)(q + ∆q) – pq = q∆p + p∆q + ∆p∆q.

For small values of ∆p and ∆q, the value of the term ∆p∆q is negligible,
and in that case, the change in the expenditure on the good is approximately
given by q∆p + p∆q.

∆q
Approximate change in expenditure = ∆E = q∆p + p∆q = ∆p(q + p ∆ )

p
∆q p

= ∆p[q(1 + ∆p q )] = ∆p[q(1 + e )].
D

Note that

if e  < –1, then q (1 + e ) < 0, and hence, ∆E has the opposite sign as ∆p,
D D

if e > –1, then q (1 + e ) > 0, and hence, ∆E has the same sign as ∆p,
D D

if e = –1, then q (1 + e ) = 0, and hence, ∆E = 0.
D D

• The budget set is the collection of all bundles of goods that a consumer can buy
with her income at the prevailing market prices.

• The budget line represents all bundles which cost the consumer her entire income.
The budget line is negatively sloping.

• The budget set changes if either of the two prices or the income changes.

• The consumer has well-defined preferences over the collection of all possible
bundles. She can rank the available bundles according to her preferences 33
over them.

• The consumer’s preferences are assumed to be monotonic.

• An indifference curve is a locus of all points representing bundles among which
the consumer is indifferent.

• Monotonicity of preferences implies that the indifference curve is downward
sloping.

• A consumer’s preferences, in general, can be represented by an indifference map.

• A consumer’s preferences, in general, can also be represented by a utility function.

• A rational consumer always chooses her most preferred bundle from the budget set.

• The consumer’s optimum bundle is located at the point of tangency between the
budget line and an indifference curve.

• The consumer’s demand curve gives the amount of the good that a consumer
chooses at different levels of its price when the price of other goods, the consumer’s
income and her tastes and preferences remain unchanged.

• The demand curve is generally downward sloping.

• The demand for a normal good increases (decreases) with increase (decrease) in
the consumer’s income.

• The demand for an inferior good decreases (increases) as the income of the
consumer increases (decreases).

• The market demand curve represents the demand of all consumers in the market

Reprint 2024-25

SSSSSuuuuummmmmmmmmmaaaaarrrrryyyyy

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



taken together at different levels of the price of the good.

• The price elasticity of demand for a good is defined as the percentage change in
demand for the good divided by the percentage change in its price.

• The elasticity of demand is a pure number.

• Elasticity of demand for a good and total expenditure on the good are closely
related.

Budget set Budget line
Preference Indifference
Indifference curve Marginal Rate of substitution
Monotonic preferences Diminishing rate of substitution
Indifference map,Utility function Consumer’s optimum
Demand Law of demand
Demand curve Substitution effect
Income effect Normal good
Inferior good Substitute
Complement Price elasticity of demand

1. What do you mean by the budget set of a consumer?

2. What is budget line?

3. Explain why the budget line is downward sloping.

4. A consumer wants to consume two goods. The prices of the two goods are Rs 4
and Rs 5 respectively. The consumer’s income is Rs 20.
(i) Write down the equation of the budget line.

(ii) How much of good 1 can the consumer consume if she spends her entire
income on that good?

(iii) How much of good 2 can she consume if she spends her entire income on
that good?

34 (iv) What is the slope of the budget line?

Questions 5, 6 and 7 are related to question 4.

5. How does the budget line change if the consumer’s income increases to Rs 40
but the prices remain unchanged?

6. How does the budget line change if the price of good 2 decreases by a rupee
but the price of good 1 and the consumer’s income remain unchanged?

7. What happens to the budget set if both the prices as well as the income double?

8. Suppose a consumer can afford to buy 6 units of good 1 and 8 units of good 2
if she spends her entire income. The prices of the two goods are Rs 6 and Rs 8
respectively. How much is the consumer’s income?

9. Suppose a consumer wants to consume two goods which are available only in
integer units. The two goods are equally priced at Rs 10 and the consumer’s
income is Rs 40.
(i) Write down all the bundles that are available to the consumer.

(ii) Among the bundles that are available to the consumer, identify those which
cost her exactly Rs 40.

10. What do you mean by ‘monotonic preferences’?

11. If a consumer has monotonic preferences, can she be indifferent between the
bundles (10, 8) and (8, 6)?

12. Suppose a consumer’s preferences are monotonic. What can you say about
her preference ranking over the bundles (10, 10), (10, 9) and (9, 9)?

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory
Microeconomics

EEEEExxxxxeeeeerrrrrccccciiiiissssseeeeesssss KKKKKeeeeeyyyyy     CCCCCooooonnnnnccccceeeeeppppptttttsssss



13. Suppose your friend is indifferent to the bundles (5, 6) and (6, 6). Are the
preferences of your friend monotonic?

14. Suppose there are two consumers in the market for a good and their demand
functions are as follows:

d (p) = 20 – p for any price less than or equal to 20, and d (p) = 0 at any price
1 1

greater than 20.

d (p) = 30 – 2p for any price less than or equal to 15 and d (p) = 0 at any price
2 1

greater than 15.

Find out the market demand function.

15. Suppose there are 20 consumers for a good and they have identical demand
functions:

10
d(p) = 10 – 3p for any price less than or equal to  and d (p) = 0 at any price

3 1

10
greater than .

3
What is the market demand function?

16. Consider a market where there are just two p d d
1 2

consumers and suppose their demands for the
good are given as follows: 1 9 24

Calculate the market demand for the good. 2 8 20
3  7 18
4 6 16
5 5 14
6 4 12

17. What do you mean by a normal good?

18. What do you mean by an ‘inferior good’? Give some examples.

19. What do you mean by substitutes? Give examples of two goods which are
substitutes of each other.

20. What do you mean by complements? Give examples of two goods which are 35

complements of each other.

21. Explain price elasticity of demand.

22. Consider the demand for a good. At price Rs 4, the demand for the good is 25
units. Suppose price of the good increases to Rs 5, and as a result, the demand
for the good falls to 20 units. Calculate the price elasticity .

5
23. Consider the demand curve D (p) = 10 – 3p. What is the elasticity at price ?

3
24. Suppose the price elasticity of demand for a good is – 0.2. If there is a 5 %

increase in the price of the good, by what percentage will the demand for the
good go down?

25. Suppose the price elasticity of demand for a good is – 0.2. How will the
expenditure on the good be affected if there is a 10 % increase in the price of
the good?

27. Suppose there was a 4 % decrease in the price of a good, and as a result, the
expenditure on the good increased by 2 %. What can you say about the elasticity
of demand?

Reprint 2024-25

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour