Chapter 5

Market Equilibrium SS

pf

p*

This chapter will be built on the foundation laid down in Chapters p1

DD
2 and 4 where we studied the consumer and firm behaviour when
they are price takers. In Chapter 2, we have seen that an O q' q'

1 1 q* q2 q1

individual’s demand curve for a commodity tells us what quantity Quantity

a consumer is willing to buy at different prices when he takes price
as given. The market demand curve in turn tells us how much of
the commodity all the consumers taken together are willing to
purchase at different prices when everyone takes price as given.
In Chapter 4, we have seen that an individual firm’s supply curve
tells us the quantity of the commodity that a profit-maximising
firm would wish to sell at different prices when it takes price as
given and the market supply curve tells us how much of the
commodity all the firms taken together would wish to supply at
different prices when each firm takes price as given.

In this chapter, we combine both consumers’ and firms’
behaviour to study market equilibrium through demand-supply
analysis and determine at what price equilibrium will be attained.
We also examine the effects of demand and supply shifts on
equilibrium. At the end of the chapter, we will look at some of the
applications of demand-supply analysis.

5.1 EQUILIBRIUM, EXCESS DEMAND, EXCESS SUPPLY

A perfectly competitive market consists of buyers and sellers who
are driven by their self-interested objectives. Recall from Chapters
2 and 4 that objectives of the consumers are to maximise their
respective preference and that of the firms are to maximise their
respective profits. Both the consumers’ and firms’ objectives are
compatible in the equilibrium.

An equilibrium is defined as a situation where the plans of all
consumers and firms in the market match and the market clears.
In equilibrium, the aggregate quantity that all firms wish to sell
equals the quantity that all the consumers in the market wish to
buy; in other words, market supply equals market demand. The
price at which equilibrium is reached is called equilibrium price
and the quantity bought and sold at this price is called equilibrium
quantity. Therefore, (p*, q*) is an equilibrium if

qD(p∗) = qS(p∗)

Reprint 2024-25

Price



where p∗ denotes the equilibrium price and qD(p∗) and qS(p∗) denote the market
demand and market supply of the commodity respectively at price p∗.

If at a price, market supply is greater than market demand, we say that
there is an excess supply in the market at that price and if market demand
exceeds market supply at a price, it is said that excess demand exists in the
market at that price. Therefore, equilibrium in a perfectly competitive market
can be defined alternatively as zero excess demand-zero excess supply situation.
Whenever market supply is not equal to market demand, and hence the market
is not in equilibrium, there will be a tendency for the price to change. In the next
two sections, we will try to understand what drives this change.

Out-of-equilibrium Behaviour

From the time of Adam Smith (1723-1790), it has been maintained that in
a perfectly competitive market an ‘Invisible Hand’ is at play which changes
price whenever there is imbalance in the market. Our intuition also tells us
that this ‘Invisible Hand’ should raise the prices in case of ‘excess demand’
and lower the prices in case of ‘excess supply’. Throughout our analysis we
shall maintain that the ‘Invisible Hand’ plays this very important role.
Moreover, we shall take it that the ‘Invisible Hand’ by following this process
is able to reach the equilibrium. This assumption will be taken to hold in all
that we discuss in the text.

5.1.1 Market Equilibrium: Fixed Number of Firms

Recall that in Chapter 2 we have derived the market demand curve for price-
taking consumers, and for price-taking firms the market supply curve was
derived in Chapter 4 under the assumption of a fixed number of firms. In this
section with the help of these two curves we will look at how supply and demand
forces work together to determine where the market will be in equilibrium when
the number of firms is fixed. We will also study how the equilibrium price and

72 quantity change due to shifts in demand and supply curves.
Figure 5.1 illustrates equilibrium

for a perfectly competitive market Price
with a fixed number of firms. Here
SS denotes the market supply
curve and DD denotes the market

SS
demand curve for a commodity.
The market supply curve SS p2

shows how much of the
p*

commodity, firms would wish to
supply at different prices, and the

p
demand curve DD tells us how 1

DD
much of the commodity, the
consumers would be willing to O q'1 q'2 q* q2 q1 Quantity
purchase at different prices. Fig. 5.1
Graphically, an equilibrium is a
point where the market supply Market Equilibrium with Fixed Number of

curve intersects the market Firms. Equilibrium occurs at the intersection of the
market demand curve DD and market supply curve

demand curve because this is SS. The equilibrium quantity is q* and the equilibrium
where the market demand equals price is p*. At a price greater than p*, there will be
market supply. At any other point, excess supply, and at a price below p*, there will be
either there is excess supply or excess demand.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory Microeconomics



there is excess demand. To see what happens when market demand does not
equal market supply, let us look in figure 5.1 again.

In Figure 5.1, if the prevailing price is p , the market demand is q  whereas
1 1

the market supply is q1'  . Therefore, there is excess demand in the market equal
to q1' q . Some consumers who are either unable to obtain the commodity at all

1

or obtain it in insufficient quantity will be willing to pay more than p . The market
1

price would tend to increase. All other things remaining the same as price rises,
quantity demanded falls and quantity supplied increases. The market moves
towards the point where the quantity that the firms want to sell is equal to the
quantity that the consumers want to buy. This happens when price is p* , the
supply decisions of the firms only match with the demand decisions of the
consumers.

Similarly, if the prevailing price is p , the market supply (q ) will exceed the
2 2

market demand ( q2'  ) at that price giving rise to excess supply equal to q2' q .
2

Some firms will not be then able to sell  quantity they want to sell; so, they will
lower their price. All other things remaining the same as price falls, quantity
demanded rises, quantity supplied falls, and at p*, the firms are able to sell
their desired output since market demand equals market supply at that price.
Therefore, p* is the equilibrium price and the corresponding quantity q* is the
equilibrium quantity.

To understand the equilibrium price and quantity determination more
clearly, let us explain it through an example.

EXAMPLE  5.1

Let us consider the example of a market consisting of identical1 farms producing
same quality of wheat. Suppose the market demand curve and the market supply
curve for wheat are given by:

qD = 200 – p for 0 ≤ p ≤ 200

= 0 for p > 200 73

qS = 120 + p for p ≥ 10

= 0 for 0 ≤ p < 10

where qD and qS denote the demand for and supply of wheat (in kg) respectively
and p denotes the price of wheat per kg in rupees.

Since at equilibrium price market clears, we find the equilibrium price
(denoted by p*) by equating market demand and supply and solve for p*.

qD(p*) = qS(p*)

 200 – p* = 120 + p*

Rearranging terms,

2p* = 80

  p* = 40

Therefore, the equilibrium price of wheat is Rs 40 per kg. The equilibrium
quantity (denoted by q*) is obtained by substituting the equilibrium price into
either the demand or the supply curve’s equation since in equilibrium quantity
demanded and supplied are equal.

1Here, by identical we mean that all farms have same cost structure.

Reprint 2024-25

Market Equilibrium



qD = q* = 200 – 40 = 160

Alternatively,

qS = q* = 120 + 40 = 160

Thus, the equilibrium quantity is 160 kg.
At a price less than p*, say p1 = 25

qD = 200 – 25 = 175

qS = 120 + 25 = 145

Therefore, at p  = 25, qD > qS which implies that there is excess demand at
1

this price.
Algebraically, excess demand (ED) can be expressed as

ED(p) = qD – qS

= 200 – p – (120 + p)

= 80 – 2p

Notice from the above expression that for any price less than p*(= 40), excess
demand will be positive.

Similarly, at a price greater than p*, say p = 45
2 

qD = 200 – 45 = 155

qS = 120 + 45 = 165

Therefore, there is excess supply at this price since qS > qD. Algebraically,
excess supply (ES) can be expressed as

ES(p) = qS – qD

= 120 + p – (200 – p)

= 2p – 80

Notice from the above expression that for any price greater than p*(= 40),

74 excess supply will be positive.
Therefore, at any price greater than p*, there will be excess supply, and at

any price lower than p*,there will be excess demand.

Wage Determination in Labour Market

Here we will briefly discuss the theory of wage determination under a
perfectly competitive market structure using the demand-supply analysis.
The basic difference between a labour market and a market for goods is
with respect to the source of supply and demand. In the labour market,
households are the suppliers of labour and the demand for labour comes
from firms whereas in the market for goods, it is the opposite. Here, it is
important to point out that by labour, we mean the hours of work provided
by labourers and not the number of labourers. The wage rate is determined
at the intersection of the demand and supply curves of labour where the
demand for and supply of labour balance. We shall now see what the demand
and supply curves of labour look like.

To examine the demand for labour by a single firm, we assume that the
labour is the only variable factor of production and the labour market is
perfectly competitive, which in turn, implies that each firm takes wage rate
as given. Also, the firm we are concerned with, is perfectly competitive in

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory Microeconomics



nature and carries out production with the goal of profit maximisation. We
also assume that given the technology of the firm, the law of diminishing
marginal product holds.

The firm being a profit maximiser will always employ labour upto
the point where the extra cost she incurs for employing the last unit of
labour is equal to the additional benefit she earns from that unit. The
extra cost of hiring one more unit of labour is the wage rate (w). The
extra output produced by one more unit of labour is its marginal product
(MPL) and by selling each extra unit of output, the additional earning of
the firm is the marginal revenue (MR) she gets from that unit. Therefore,
for each extra unit of labour, she gets an additional benefit equal to
marginal revenue times marginal product which is called Marginal
Revenue Product of Labour (MRPL). Thus, while hiring labour, the firm
employs labour up to the point where

      w = MRPL

and MRPL = MR × MPL

Since we are dealing with a perfectly competitive firm, marginal
revenue is equal to the price of the commoditya and hence marginal
revenue product of labour in this case is equal to the value of marginal
product of labour (VMP ).

L

As long as the VMPL is greater than the wage rate, the firm will earn
more profit by hiring one more unit of labour, and if at any level of labour
employment VMPL is less than the wage rate, the firm can increase her
profit by reducing a unit of labour employed.

Given the assumption of the law of diminishing marginal product,
the fact that the firm always produces at w = VMP  implies that the

L
demand curve for labour is downward sloping. To explain why it is so,
let us assume at some wage rate w , demand for labour is l . Now, suppose

1 1
the wage rate increases to w . To maintain the wage-VMPL equality, VMP

2 L

should also increase. The price of the commodity remaining 75
constantb, this is possible
only if MPL increases which in

Wage
turn implies that less labour
should be employed owing to SL

the diminishing marginal
productivity of labour.
Hence, at higher wage, less
labour is demanded thereby w*

leading to a downward
sloping demand, curve. To
arrive at the market demand DL

curve from individual firms’
demand curve, we simply
add up the demand for O l* Labour(in hrs)
labour by individual firms at
different wages and since Wage is determined at the point where the labour
each firm demands less demand and supply curves intersect.
labour as wage increases, the
market demand curve is also downward sloping.

aRecall from Chapter 4 that for a perfectly competitive firm, marginal revenue equals price.
bSince the firm under consideration is perfectly competitive, it believes it cannot influence

the price of the commodity.

Reprint 2024-25

Market Equilibrium



Having explored the demand side, we now turn to the supply side.
As already mentioned, it is the households which determine how much
labour to supply at a given wage rate. Their supply decision is essentially
a choice between income and leisure. On the one hand, individuals enjoy
leisure and find work irksome and on the other, they value income for
which they must work.

So there is a trade-off between enjoying leisure and spending more
hours for work. To derive the labour supply curve for a single individual,
let us assume at some wage rate w , the individual supplies l  units of

1 1
labour. Now suppose the wage rises to w . This increase in wage rate will

2
have two effects: First, due to the increase in wage rate, the opportunity
cost of leisure increases which makes leisure costlier. Therefore, the
individual will want to enjoy less leisure. As a result, they will work for
longer hours. Second, because of the increase in wage rate to w , the

2
purchasing power of the individual increases. So, she would want to
spend more on leisure activities. The final effect of the increase in wage
rate will depend on which of the two effects predominates. At low wage
rates, the first effect dominates the second and so the individual will be
willing to supply more labour with an increase in wage rate. But at high
wage rates, the second effect dominates the first and the individual will
be willing to supply less labour for every increase in wage rate. Thus, we
get a backward bending individual labour supply curve which shows
that up to a certain wage rate for every increase in wage rate, there is an
increased supply of labour. Beyond this wage rate for every increase in
wage rate, labour supply will decrease. Nevertheless, the market supply
curve of labour, which we obtain by aggregating individuals’ supply at
different wages, will be upward sloping because though at higher wages
some individuals may be willing to work less, many more individuals
will be attracted to supply more labour.

With an upward sloping supply curve and downward sloping demand
curve, the equilibrium wage rate is determined at the point where these two

76 curves intersect; in other words, where the labour that the households wish
to supply is equal to the labour that the firms wish to hire. This is shown in
the diagram.

Shifts in Demand and Supply
In the above section, we studied market equilibrium under the assumption
that tastes and preferences of the consumers, prices of the related
commodities, incomes of the consumers, technology, size of the market, prices
of the inputs used in production, etc remain constant. However, with changes
in one or more of these factors either the supply or the demand curve or both
may shift, thereby affecting the equilibrium price and quantity. Here, we first
develop the general theory which outlines the impact of these shifts on
equilibrium and then discuss the impact of changes in some of the above
mentioned factors on equilibrium.

Demand Shift
Consider Figure 5.2 in which we depict the impact of demand shift when the
number of firms is fixed. Here, the initial equilibrium point is E where the market
demand curve DD  and the market supply curve SS  intersect so that q  and p

0 0 0 0
are the equilibrium quantity and price respectively.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory Microeconomics



Price Price

SS0 SS0

G E
p2 p0

F
p0 p1

E

DD2 DD0

DD0 DD1

O q0 q q¢¢
2 0 Quantity O q1

0 q1 q0 Quantity
Fig. 5.2 (a) (b)

Shifts in Demand. Initially, the market equilibrium is at E. Due to the shift in demand to the
right, the new equilibrium is at G as shown in panel (a) and due to the leftward shift, the new
equilibrium is at F, as shown in panel (b). With rightward shift the equilibrium quantity and price
increase whereas with leftward shift, equilibrium quantity and price decrease.

Now suppose the market demand curve shifts rightward to DD  with supply
2

curve remaining unchanged at SS , as shown in panel (a). This shift indicates
0

that at any price the quantity demanded is more than before. Therefore, at price
p  now there is excess demand in the market equal to q0q0'' . In response to this

0

excess demand some individuals will be willing to pay higher price and the price
would tend to rise. The new equilibrium is attained at G where the equilibrium
quantity q  is greater than q  and the equilibrium price p  is greater than p .

2 0 2 0

Similarly if the demand curve shifts leftward to DD , as shown in panel (b), at
1

any price the quantity demanded will be less than what it was before the shift.
Therefore, at the initial equilibrium price p  now there will be excess supply in

0

the market equal to q0' q0  in response to which some firms will reduce the price
of their commodity so that they can sell their desired quantity. The new 77
equilibrium is attained at the point F at which the demand curve DD  and the

1

supply curve SS  intersect and the resulting equilibrium price p  is less than p
0 1 0

and quantity q  is less than q . Notice that the direction of change in equilibrium
1 0

price and quantity is same whenever there is a shift in demand curve.
Having developed the general theory, we now consider some examples to

understand how demand curve and the equilibrium quantity and price are
affected in response to a change in some of the aforementioned factors which
are also enlisted in Chapter 2. More specifically, we would analyse the impact
of increase in consumers’ income and an increase in the number of consumers
on equilibrium.

Suppose due to a hike in the salaries of the consumers, their incomes increase.
How would it affect equilibrium? With an increase in income, consumers are able
to spend more money on some goods. But recall from Chapter 2 that the consumers
will spend less on an inferior good with increase in income whereas for a normal
good, with prices of all commodities and tastes and preferences of the consumers
held constant, we would expect the demand for the good to increase at each price
as a result of which the market demand curve will shift rightward. Here we consider
the example of a normal good like clothes, the demand for which increases
with increase in income of consumers, thereby causing a rightward shift in the
demand curve. However, this income increase does not have any impact on

Reprint 2024-25

Market Equilibrium



the supply curve, which shifts only due to some changes in the factors relating to
technology or cost of production of the firms. Thus, the supply curve remains
unchanged. In the Figure 5.2 (a), this is shown by a shift in the demand curve
from DD  to DD  but the supply curve remains unchanged at SS . From the figure,

0 2 0

it is clear that at the new equilibrium, the price of clothes is higher and the quantity
demanded and sold is also higher.

Now let us turn to another example. Suppose due to some reason, there is
increase in the number of consumers in the market for clothes. As the number
of consumers increases, other factors remaining unchanged, at each price, more
clothes will be demanded. Thus, the demand curve will shift rightwards. But
this increase in the number of consumers does not have any impact on the
supply curve since the supply curve may shift only due to changes in the
parameters relating to firms’ behaviour or with an increase in the number of
firms, as stated in Chapter 4. This case again can be illustrated through Figure
5.2(a) in which the demand curve DD  shifts rightward to DD , the supply curve

0 2

remaining unchanged at SS . The figure clearly shows that compared to the old
0

equilibrium point E, at point G which is the new equilibrium point, there is an
increase in both price and quantity demanded and supplied.

Supply Shift

In Figure 5.3, we show the impact of a shift in supply curve on the equilibrium
price and quantity. Suppose, initially, the market is in equilibrium at point E
where the market demand curve DD  intersects the market supply curve SS

0 0

such that the equilibrium price is p  and the equilibrium quantity is q .
0 0

78

Shifts in Supply. Initially, the market equilibrium is at E. Due to the shift in supply curve to the
left, the new equilibrium point is G as shown in panel (a) and due to the rightward shift the new
equilibrium point is F, as shown in panel (b). With rightward shift, the equilibrium quantity
increases and price decreases whereas with leftward shift,equilibrium quantity decreases and
price increases.

Now, suppose due to some reason, the market supply curve shifts leftward to
SS  with the demand curve remaining unchanged, as shown in panel (a). Because

2

of the shift, at the prevailing price, p , there will be excess demand equal to q0'' q  in
0 o

the market. Some consumers who are unable to obtain the good will be willing to
pay higher prices and the market price tends to increase. The new equilibrium is
attained at point G where the supply curve SS intersects the demand curve DD

2 0
such that q quantity will be bought and sold at price p . Similarly, when supply

2 2
curve shifts rightward, as shown in panel (b), at p  there will be supply excess of

0

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory Microeconomics



goods  equal to q q . n r spo se 
0 0' I e n to this excess supply, some firms will reduce

their price and the new equilibrium will be attained at F where the supply curve
SS intersects the demand curve DD such that the new market price is p at

1 0 1 
which q quantity is bought and sold.Notice the directions of change in price and

1  
quantity are opposite whenever there is a shift in supply curve.

Now with this understanding, we can analyse the behaviour of equilibrium
price and quantity when various aspects of the market change. Here, we will
consider the effect of an increase in input price and an increase in number of
firms on equilibrium.

Let us consider a situation where all other things remaining constant, there
is an increase in the price of an input used in the production of a commodity.
This will increase the marginal cost of production of the firms using this input.
Therefore, at each price, the market supply will be less than before. Hence, the
supply curve shifts leftward. In the Figure 5.3(a), this is shown by a shift in the
supply curve from SS  to SS . But this increase in input price has no impact on

0 2
the demand of the consumers since it does not depend on the input prices
directly. Therefore, the demand curve remains unchanged. In Figure 5.3(a), this
is shown by the demand curve remaining unchanged at DD . As a result,

0
compared to the old equilibrium, now the market price rises and quantity
produced decreases.

Let us discuss the impact of an increase in the number of firms. Since at
each price now more firms will supply the commodity, the supply curve shifts to
the right but it does not have any effect on the demand curve. This example can
be illustrated by Figure 5.3(b) where the supply curve shifts from SS  to SS

0 1
whereas the demand curve remains unchanged at DD . From the figure, we can

0
say that there will be a decrease in price of the commodity and increase in the
quantity produced compared to the initial situation.

Simultaneous Shifts of Demand and Supply

What happens when both demand and supply curves shift simultaneously?
The simultaneous shifts can happen in four possible ways: 79
(i) Both supply and demand curves shift rightwards.
(ii) Both supply and demand curves shift leftwards.
(iii) Supply curve shifts leftward and demand curve shifts rightward.
(iv) Supply curve shifts rightward and demand curve shifts leftward.

The impact on equilibrium price and quantity in all the four cases are
given in Table 5.1. Each row of the table describes the direction in which the
equilibrium price and quantity will change for each possible combination of
the simultaneous shifts in demand and supply curves. For instance, from the
second row of the table, we see that due to a rightward shift in both demand
and supply curves, the equilibrium quantity increases invariably but the
equilibrium price may either increase, decrease or remain unchanged. The
actual direction in which the price will change will depend on the
magnitude of the shifts. Check this yourself by varying the magnitude
of shifts for this particular case.

In the first two cases which are shown in the first two rows of the table, the
impact on equilibrium quantity is unambiguous but the equilibrium price may
change, if at all, in either direction depending on the magnitudes of shifts. In the
next two cases, shown in the last two rows of the table, the effect on price is
unambiguous whereas effect on quantity depends on the magnitude of shifts in
the two curves.

Reprint 2024-25

Market Equilibrium



Table 5.1:  Impact of Simultaneous Shifts on Equilibrium

Shift in Demand Shift in Supply Quantity Price

Leftward Leftward Decreases May increase,
decrease or
remain unchanged

Rightward Rightward Increases May increase,
decrease or
remain unchanged

Leftward Rightward May increase, Decreases
decrease or
remain unchanged

Rightward Leftward May increase, Increases
decrease or
remain unchanged

Here we give diagrammatic representations for case (ii) and case (iii) in Figure
5.4 and leave the rest as exercises for the readers.

80

Simultaneous Shifts in Demand and Supply. Initially, the equilibrium is at E where
the demand curve DD  and supply curve SS  intersect. In panel (a), both the supply and

0 0

the demand curves shift rightward leaving price unchanged but a higher equilibrium quantity.
In panel (b), the supply curve shifts rightward and demand curve shifts leftward leaving
quantity unchanged but a lower equilibrium price.

In the Figure 5.4(a), it can be seen that due to rightward shifts in both demand
and supply curves, the equilibrium quantity increases whereas the equilibrium
price remains unchanged, and in Figure 5.4(b), equilibrium quantity remains
the same whereas price decreases due to a leftward shift in demand curve and a
rightward shift in supply curve.

5.1.2 Market Equilibrium: Free Entry and Exit

In the last section, the market equilibrium was studied under the assumption
that there is a fixed number of firms. In this section, we will study market
equilibrium when firms can enter and exit the market freely. Here, for simplicity,
we assume that all the firms in the market are identical.

What is the implication of the entry and exit assumption? This assumption
implies that in equilibrium no firm earns supernormal profit or incurs loss by
remaining in production; in other words, the equilibrium price will be equal to
the minimum average cost of the firms.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory Microeconomics



To see why it is so, suppose, at the
prevailing market price, each firm is
earning supernormal profit. The
possibility of earning supernormal profit
will attract some new firms. As new
firms enter the market supply curve
shifts rightward. However, demand remains
unchanged. This causes market price to fall. As
prices fall, supernormal profits are eventually
wiped out. At this point, with all firms in the
market earning normal profit, no more firms will
have incentive to enter. Similarly, if the firms are
earning less than normal profit at the prevailing
price, some firms will exit which will lead to an
increase in price, and with sufficient number of
firms, the profits of each firm will increase to
the level of normal profit. At this point, no more
firm will want to leave since they will be earning
normal profit here. Thus, with free entry and

Free for all
exit, each firm will always earn normal profit at
the prevailing market price.

Recall from the previous chapter that the firms will earn supernormal profit
so long as the price is greater than the minimum average cost and at prices less
than minimum average cost, they will earn less than normal profit. Therefore, at
prices greater than the minimum average cost, new firms will enter, and at prices
below minimum average cost, existing firms will start exiting. At the price level
equal to the minimum average cost of the firms, each firm will earn normal profit
so that no new firm will be attracted to enter the market. Also the existing firms
will not leave the market since they are not incurring any loss by producing at
this point. So, this price will prevail in the market.

Therefore, free entry and exit of the firms imply that the market price will 81

always be equal to the minimum average cost, that is

p = min AC

From the above, it follows
that the equilibrium price will be
equal to the minimum average
cost of the firms. In equilibrium,
the quantity supplied will be
determined by the market
demand at that price so that they
are equal. Graphically, this is
shown in Figure 5.5 where the
market will be in equilibrium at
point E at which the demand
curve DD intersects the p  = min

0

AC line such that the market
Price Determination with Free Entry and

price is p  and the total quantity
0 Exit. With free entry and exit in a perfectly

demanded and supplied is competitive market, the equilibrium price is always
equal to q .

0 equal to min AC and the equilibrium quantity is
At p  = min AC each firm determined at the intersection of the market

0
supplies same amount of output, demand curve DD with the price line p = min AC.

Reprint 2024-25

Market Equilibrium



say q . Therefore, the equilibrium number of firms in the market is equal to the
0f 

number of firms required to supply q  output at p , each in turn supplying q
0 0 0f

amount at that price. If we denote the equilibrium number of firms by n , then
0  

q0
n  = 

0 q0 f

To understand the equilibrium price and quantity determination more
clearly, let us look at the following example.

EXAMPLE  5.2

Consider the example of a market for wheat such that the demand curve for
wheat is given as follows

qD = 200 – p for 0 ≤ p ≤ 200

= 0 for p > 200

Assume that the market consists of identical firms. The supply curve of a
single firm is given by

s
q = 10 + p for p ≥ 20

f

= 0 for 0 ≤ p < 20

The free entry and exit of firms would mean that the firms will never produce
below minimum average cost because otherwise they will incur loss from
production in which case they will exit the market.

As we know, with free entry and exit, the market will be in equilibrium at a
price which equals the minimum average cost of the firms. Therefore, the
equilibrium price is

p  = 20
0

At this price, market will supply that quantity which is equal to the market
demand. Therefore, from the demand curve, we get the equilibrium quantity:

82
q  = 200 – 20 = 180

0

Also at p  = 20, each firm supplies
0

q  = 10 + 20 = 30
0f

Therefore, the equilibrium number of firms is
q0 180

n  = q  =  = 6
0 0

f 30
Thus, with free entry and exit, the equilibrium price, quantity and number of
firms are Rs 20, 180 kg and 6 respectively.

Shifts in Demand

Let us examine the impact of shift in demand on equilibrium price and quantity
when the firms can freely enter and exit the market. From the previous section,
we know that free entry and exit of the firms would imply that under all
circumstances equilibrium price will be equal to the minimum average cost of
the existing firms. Under this condition, even if the market demand curve shifts
in either direction, at the new equilibrium, the market will supply the desired
quantity at the same price.

In Figure 5.6, DD  is the market demand curve which tells us how much
0

quantity will be demanded by the consumers at different prices and p  denotes
0

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory Microeconomics



the price which is equal to the minimum average cost of the firms. The initial
equilibrium is at point E where the demand curve DD cuts the p  = minAC line

0 0

and the total quantity demanded and supplied is q . The equilibrium number of
0

firms is n  in this situation.
0

Now suppose the demand curve shifts to the right for some reason. At p
0

there will be excess demand for the commodity. Some dissatisfied consumers
will be willing to pay higher price for the commodity, so the price tends to
rise. This gives rise to a possibility of earning supernormal profit which will
attract new firms to the market. The entry of these new firms will eventually
wipe out the supernormal profit and the price will again reach p . Now higher

0

quantity will be supplied at the same price. From the panel (a), we can see
that the new demand curve DD  intersects the p  = minAC line at point F such

1 0

that the new equilibrium will be (p , q ) where q  is greater than q . The new
0 1 1 0

equilibrium number of firms n  is greater than n  because of the entry of new
1 0

firms. Similarly, for a leftward shift of the demand curve to DD , there will be
2

Shifts in Demand. Initially, the demand curve was DD , the equilibrium quantity and price
0 83

were q  and p  respectively. With rightward shift of the demand curve to DD , as shown in
0 0 1

panel (a), the equilibrium quantity increases and with leftward shift of the demand curve to
DD , as shown in panel (b), the equilibrium quantity decreases. In both the cases, the equilibrium

2

price remains unchanged at p .
0

excess supply at the price p . In response to this excess supply, some firms,
0

which will be unable to sell their desired quantity at p , will wish to lower
0

their price. The price tends to decrease which will lead to the exit of some of
the existing firms and the price will again reach p . Therefore, in the new

0

equilibrium, less quantity will be supplied which will be equal to the reduced
demand at that price. This is shown in panel (b) where due to the shift of
demand curve from DD  to DD , quantity demanded and supplied will

0 2

decrease to q whereas the price will remain unchanged at p . Here, the
2 0

equilibrium number of firms, n  is less than n  due to the exit of some existing
2 0

firms. Thus, due to a shift in demand rightwards (leftwards), the equilibrium
quantity and number of firms will increase (decrease) whereas the
equilibrium price will remain unchanged.

Here, we should note that with free entry and exit, shift in demand has a
larger effect on quantity than it does with the fixed number of firms. But
unlike with fixed number of firms, here, we do not have any effect on
equilibrium price at all.

Reprint 2024-25

Market Equilibrium



5.2 APPLICATIONS

In this section, we try to understand how the supply-demand analysis can be
applied. In particular, we look at two examples of government intervention in
the form of price control. Often, it becomes necessary for the government to
regulate the prices of certain goods and services when their prices are either too

high or too low in comparison to the
desired levels. We will analyse these
issues within the framework of perfect
competition to look at what impact
these regulations have on the market for
these goods.

5.2.1 Price Ceiling

It is not very uncommon to come across
instances where government fixes a
maximum allowable price for certain
goods. The government-imposed upper
limit on the price of a good or service is
called price ceiling. Price ceiling is
generally imposed on necessary items
like wheat, rice, kerosene, sugar and it
is fixed below the market-determined
price since at the market-determined

Price Catcher price some section of the population
will not be able to afford these goods.

Let us examine the effects of price ceiling on market equilibrium through the
example of market for wheat.

Figure 5.7 shows the market
supply curve SS and the market

84 demand curve DD for wheat.
The equilibrium price and

quantity of wheat are p* and
q* respectively. When the
government imposes price ceiling

at p which is lower than the
c

equilibrium price level, there will
be an excess demand for wheat in
the market at that price. The
consumers demand q  kilograms

c

of wheat whereas  the  firms
Effect of Price Ceiling in Wheat Market. The

supply q '  kilograms. equilibrium price and quantity are p* and q*
c

Hence, though the intention of respectively. Imposition of price ceiling at p  gives
c

rise to excess demand in the wheat market.
the government was to help the
consumers, it could end up creating shortage of wheat. How is the quantity of
wheat (q' ) then distributed among the consumers? One way of doing this is to

c

distribute it to everyone, through a system of rationing. Ration coupons are
issued to the consumers so that no individual can buy more than a certain amount
of wheat and this stipulated amount of wheat is sold through ration shops which
are also called fair price shops.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory Microeconomics



In general, price ceiling accompanied by rationing of the goods may have the
following adverse consequences on the consumers: (a) Each consumer has to
stand in long queues to buy the good from ration shops. (b) Since all consumers
will not be satisfied by the quantity of the goods that they get from the fair price
shop, some of them will be willing to pay higher price for it. This may result in
the creation of black market.

5.2.2 Price Floor

For certain goods and services, fall Price
in price below a particular level is
not desirable and hence the
government sets floors or

SS
minimum prices for these goods
and services. The government- pf

imposed lower limit on the price
p*

that may be charged for a
particular good or service is called
price floor. Most well-known DD
examples of imposition of price
floor are agricultural price O qf q* q'f Quantity
support programmes and the Fig. 5.8
minimum wage legislation.

Through an agricultural price Effect of Price Floor on the Market for Goods.

support programme, the The market equilibrium is at (p*, q*). Imposition of
price floor at p  gives rise to an excess supply.

government imposes a lower limit f

on the purchase price for some of
the agricultural goods and the floor is normally set at a level higher than the
market-determined price for these goods. Similarly, through the minimum wage
legislation, the government ensures that the wage rate of the labourers does not
fall below a particular level and here again the minimum wage rate is set above
the equilibrium wage rate. 85

Figure 5.8 shows the market supply and the market demand curve for a
commodity on which price floor is imposed. The market equilibrium here would
occur at price p* and quantity q*. But when the government imposes a floor higher
than the equilibrium price at p , the market demand is q whereas the firms want

f f 

to supply q ′, thereby leading to an excess supply in the market equal to q q ′ .
f f f

In the case of agricultural support, to prevent price from falling because of
excess supply, government needs to buy the surplus at the predetermined price.

• In a perfectly competitive market, equilibrium occurs where market demand
equals market supply.

• The equilibrium price and quantity are determined at the intersection of the
market demand and market supply curves when there is fixed number of firms.

• Each firm employs labour upto the point where the marginal revenue product
of labour equals the wage rate.

• With supply curve remaining unchanged when demand curve shifts
rightward (leftward), the equilibrium quantity increases (decreases) and
equilibrium price increases (decreases) with fixed number of firms.

Reprint 2024-25

SSSSSuuuuummmmmmmmmmaaaaarrrrryyyyy

Market Equilibrium



• With demand curve remaining unchanged when supply curve shifts
rightward (leftward), the equilibrium quantity increases (decreases) and
equilibrium price decreases (increases) with fixed number of firms.

• When both demand and supply curves shift in the same direction, the effect
on equilibrium quantity can be unambiguously determined whereas the
effect on equilibrium price depends on the magnitude of the shifts.

• When demand and supply curves shift in opposite directions, the effect on
equilibrium price can be unambiguously determined whereas the effect on
equilibrium quantity depends on the magnitude of the shifts.

• In a perfectly competitive market with identical firms if the firms can enter
and exit the market freely, the equilibrium price is always equal to minimum
average cost of the firms.

• With free entry and exit, the shift in demand has no impact on equilibrium
price but changes the equilibrium quantity and number of firms in the same
direction as the change in demand.

• In comparison to a market with fixed number of firms, the impact of a shift
in demand curve on equilibrium quantity is more pronounced in a market
with free entry and exit.

• Imposition of price ceiling below the equilibrium price leads to an excess demand.
• Imposition of price floor above the equilibrium price leads to an excess supply.

Equilibrium
Excess demand
Excess supply
Marginal revenue product of labour
Value of marginal product of labour
Price ceiling, Price floor

86
1. Explain market equilibrium.

2. When do we say there is excess demand for a commodity in the market?

3. When do we say there is excess supply for a commodity in the market?

4. What will happen if the price prevailing in the market is
(i) above the equilibrium price?

(ii) below the equilibrium price?

5. Explain how price is determined in a perfectly competitive market with fixed
number of firms.

6. Suppose the price at which equilibrium is attained in exercise 5 is above the
minimum average cost of the firms constituting the market. Now if we allow for
free entry and exit of firms, how will the market price adjust to it?

7. At what level of price do the firms in a perfectly competitive market supply
when free entry and exit is allowed in the market? How is equilibrium quantity
determined in such a market?

8. How is the equilibrium number of firms determined in a market where entry
and exit is permitted?

9. How are equilibrium price and quantity affected when income of the consumers
(a) increase? (b) decrease?

10. Using supply and demand curves, show how an increase in the price of shoes
affects the price of a pair of socks and the number of pairs of socks bought and sold.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory Microeconomics

EEEEExxxxxeeeeerrrrrccccciiiiissssseeeeesssss KKKKKeeeeeyyyyy     CCCCCooooonnnnnccccceeeeeppppptttttsssss



11.How will a change in price of coffee affect the equilibrium price of tea? Explain
the effect on equilibrium quantity also through a diagram.

12.How do the equilibrium price and quantity of a commodity change when price
of input used in its production changes?

13. If the price of a substitute(Y) of good X increases, what impact does it have on
the equilibrium price and quantity of good X?

14.Compare the effect of shift in demand curve on the equilibrium when the number
of firms in the market is fixed with the situation when entry-exit is permitted.

15.Explain through a diagram the effect of a rightward shift of both the demand
and supply curves on equilibrium price and quantity.

16.How are the equilibrium price and quantity affected when
(a) both demand and supply curves shift in the same direction?
(b) demand and supply curves shift in opposite directions?

17. In what respect do the supply and demand curves in the labour market differ
from those in the goods market?

18.How is the optimal amount of labour determined in a perfectly competitive market?

19.How is the wage rate determined in a perfectly competitive labour market?
20.Can you think of any commodity on which price ceiling is imposed in India?

What may be the consequence of price-ceiling?
21.A shift in demand curve has a larger effect on price and smaller effect on

quantity when the number of firms is fixed compared to the situation when
free entry and exit is permitted. Explain.

22.Suppose the demand and supply curve of commodity X in a perfectly competitive
market are given by:

qD = 700 – p
qS = 500 + 3p for p ≥ 15

= 0 for 0 ≤ p < 15
Assume that the market consists of identical firms. Identify the reason behind
the market supply of commodity X being zero at any price less than Rs 15.
What will be the equilibrium price for this commodity? At equilibrium, what
quantity of X will be produced?

23.Considering the same demand curve as in exercise 22, now let us allow for free 87

entry and exit of the firms producing commodity X. Also assume the market
consists of identical firms producing commodity X. Let the supply curve of a
single firm be explained as

qS  = 8 + 3p for p ≥ 20
f

= 0 for 0 ≤ p < 20
(a) What is the significance of p = 20?
(b) At what price will the market for X be in equilibrium? State the reason for

your answer.
(c) Calculate the equilibrium quantity and number of firms.

24.Suppose the demand and supply curves of salt are given by:

qD = 1,000 – p qS = 700 + 2p

(a) Find the equilibrium price and quantity.
(b) Now suppose that the price of an input used to produce salt has increased

so that the new supply curve is
qS = 400 + 2p
How does the equilibrium price and quantity change? Does the change
conform to your expectation?

(c) Suppose the government has imposed a tax of Rs 3 per unit of sale of salt.
How does it affect the equilibrium price and quantity?

25. Suppose the market determined rent for apartments is too high for common people
to afford. If the government comes forward to help those seeking apartments on rent
by imposing control on rent, what impact will it have on the market for apartments?

Reprint 2024-25

Market Equilibrium



Average cost Total cost per unit of output.

Average fixed cost Total fixed cost per unit of output.

Average product Output per unit of the variable input.

Average revenue Total revenue per unit of output.
Average variable cost Total variable cost per unit of output.

Break-even point is the point on the supply curve at which a firm
earns normal profit.

Budget line consists of all bundles which cost exactly equal to the
consumer’s income.

Budget set is the collection of all bundles that the consumer can
buy with her income at the prevailing market prices.

Constant returns to scale is a property of production function that
holds when a proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase
in output by the same proportion.

Cost function For every level of output, it shows the minimum cost
for the firm.

Decreasing returns to scale is a property of production function
88 that holds when a proportional increase in all inputs results in an

increase in output by less than the proportion.

Demand curve is a graphical representation of the demand function.
It gives the quantity demanded by the consumer at each price.

Demand function A consumer’s demand function for a good gives
the amount of the good that the consumer chooses at different levels
of its price when the other things remain unchanged.

Duopoly is a market with just two firms.

Equilibrium is a situation where the plans of all consumers and
firms in the market match.

Excess demand If at a price market, demand exceeds market supply,
it is said that excess demand exists in the market at that price.

Excess supply If at a price market, supply is greater than market
demand, it is said that there is excess supply in the market at that
price.

Firm’s supply curve shows the levels of output that a profit-
maximising firm will choose to produce at different values of the
market price.

Fixed input An input which cannot be varied in the short run is
called a fixed input.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory Microeconomics



Income effect The change in the optimal quantity of a good when the purchasing
power changes consequent upon a change in the price of the good is called the
income effect.

Increasing returns to scale is a property of production function that holds when a
proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase in output by more than
the proportion.

Indifference curve is the locus of all points among which the consumer is indifferent.

Inferior good A good for which the demand decreases with increase in the income
of the consumer is called an inferior good.

Isoquant is the set of all possible combinations of the two inputs that yield the
same maximum possible level of output.

Law of demand If a consumer’s demand for a good moves in the same direction as
the consumer’s income, the consumer’s demand for that good must be inversely
related to the price of the good.

Law of diminishing marginal product If we keep increasing the employment of an
input with other inputs fixed then eventually a point will be reached after which the
marginal product of that input will start falling.

Law of variable proportions The marginal product of a factor input initially rises
with its employment level when the level of employment of the input is low. But after
reaching a certain level of employment, it starts falling.

Long run refers to a time period in which all factors of production can
be varied.

Marginal cost Change in total cost per unit of change in output.

Marginal product Change in output per unit of change in the input when all other
inputs are held constant.

Marginal revenue Change in total revenue per unit change in sale of output.

Marginal revenue product(MRP) of a factor Marginal Revenue times Marginal
Product of the factor.

Market supply curve shows the output levels that firms in the market produce in
aggregate corresponding to different values of the market price. 89

Monopolistic competition is a market structure where there exit a very large
number of sellers selling differentiated but substitutable products.

Monopoly A market structure in which there is a single seller and there are sufficient
restrictions to prevent any other seller from entering the market.

Monotonic preferences A consumer’s preferences are monotonic if and only if
between any two bundles, the consumer prefers the bundle which has more of at
least one of the goods and no less of the other good as compared to the other bundle.

Normal good A good for which the demand increases with increase in the income of
the consumer is called a normal good.

Normal profit The profit level that is just enough to cover the explicit costs and
opportunity costs of the firm is called the normal profit.

Oligopoly A market consisting of more than one (but few) sellers is called a oligopoly.

Opportunity cost of some activity is the gain foregone from the second best activity.

Perfect competition A market environment wherein (i) all firms in the market
produce the same good and (ii) buyers and sellers are price-takers.

Price ceiling The government-imposed upper limit on the price of a good or service
is called price ceiling.

Price elasticity of demand for a good is defined as the percentage change in
demand for the good divided by the percentage change in its price.

Reprint 2024-25

Glossary



Price elasticity of supply is the percentage change in quantity supplied due to a
one per cent change in the market price of the good.

Price floor The government-imposed lower limit on the price that may be charged
for a particular good or service is called price floor.

Price line is a horizontal straight line that shows the relationship between market
price and a firm’s output level.

Production function shows the maximum quantity of output that can be produced
by using different combinations of the inputs.

Profit is the difference between a firm’s total revenue and its total cost of production.

Short run refers to a time period in which some factors of production cannot be
varied.

Shut down point In the short run, it is the minimum point of AVC curve and in the
long run, it is the minimum point of LRAC curve.

Substitution effect The change in the optimal quantity of a good when its price
changes and the consumer’s income is adjusted so that she can just buy the bundle
that she was buying before the price change is called the substitution effect.

Super-normal profit Profit that a firm earns over and above the normal profit is
called the super-normal profit.

Total cost is the sum of total fixed cost and total variable cost.

Total fixed cost The cost that a firm incurs to employ fixed inputs is called the total
fixed cost.

Total physical product Same as the total product.

Total product If we vary a single input keeping all other inputs constant, then for
different levels of employment of that input we get different levels of output from the
production function. This relationship between the variable input and output is
referred to as total product.

Total return Same as the total product.

Total revenue is equal to the market price of the good multiplied by the quantity of
the good sold by a firm.

90 Total revenue curve shows the relationship between firm’s total revenue and firm’s
output level.

Total variable cost The cost that a firm incurs to employ variable inputs is called
the total variable cost.

Value of marginal product (VMP) of a factor Price times Marginal Product of
the factor.

Variable input An input the amount of which can be varied.

Reprint 2024-25

Introductory Microeconomics