Chapter 2

Forms oF Business 
organisation

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 identify different forms of business organisation;

•	 explain features, merits and limitations of different forms of business 
organisations;

•	 distinguish between various forms of organisations; and

•	 discuss the factors determining choice of an appropriate form of 
business organisation.

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   26 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 27

Neha,	a	bright	final	year	student	was	waiting	for	her	results	to	be	declared.	While	
at home she decided to put her free time to use. Having an aptitude for painting, 
she tried her hand at decorating clay pots and bowls with designs. She was excited 
at the praise showered on her by her friends and acquaintances on her work. She 
even managed to sell a few pieces of unique hand pottery from her home to people 
living in and around her colony. Operating from home, she was able to save on 
rental payments. She gained a lot of popularity by word of mouth publicity as a sole 
proprietor. She further perfected her skills of painting pottery and created new motifs 
and designs. All this generated great interest among her customers and provided a 
boost to the demand for her products. By the end of summer, she found that she 
had	been	able	to	make	a	profit	of	Rs.	2500	from	her	paltry	investment	in	colours,	
pottery and drawing sheets. She felt motivated to take up this work as a career. 
She has, therefore, decided to set up her own artwork business. She can continue 
running the business on her own as a sole proprietor, but she needs more money 
for doing business on a larger scale. Her father has suggested that she should form 
a partnership with her cousin to meet the need for additional funds and for sharing 
the responsibilities and risks. Side by side, he is of the opinion that it is possible 
that the business might grow further and may require the formation of a company. 
She	is	in	a	fix	as	to	what	form	of	business	organisation	she	should	go	in	for?

2.1 introduction Let us start our discussion with 
If one is planning to start a business sole proprietorship — the simplest form 
or is interested in expanding an of business organisation, and then 

move on to analysing more complex 
existing one, an important decision forms of organisations.
relates to the choice of the form of 
organisation. The most appropriate 2.2 sole ProPrietorshiP
form is determined by weighing the 
advantages and disadvantages of each Do you often go in the evenings to buy 
type of organisation against one’s own registers, pens, chart papers, etc., 
requirements. from a small neighbourhood stationery 

Var ious forms o f  business store?	Well,	 in	 all	 probability	 in	 the	
organisations from which one can course of your transactions, you have 
choose the right one include: interacted with a sole proprietor.
 (a) Sole proprietorship,                Sole proprietorship is a popular 

form of business organisation and 
 (b) Joint Hindu family business, is the most suitable form for small 
 (c) Partnership, businesses, especially in their initial 

years of operation. Sole proprietorship 
 (d) Cooperative societies, and refers to a form of business organisation 
 (e) Joint stock company. which is owned, managed and 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   27 13-01-2021   09:40:59



28 BUSINESS  STUDIES

controlled by an individual who is the the owner is personally responsible 
recipient	 of	 all	 profits	 and	 bearer	 of	 for payment of debts in case the assets 
all risks. This is evident from the term of	 the	 business	 are	not	 sufficient	 to	
itself. The word “sole” implies “only”, meet all the debts. As such the owner’s 
and “proprietor” refers to “owner”. personal possessions such as his/her 
Hence, a sole proprietor is the one who personal car and other assets could be 
is the only owner of a business. sold for repaying the debt. Suppose 

This form of business is particularly the total outside liabilities of XYZ dry 
common in areas of personalised cleaner,	a	sole	proprietorship	firm,	are	
services such as beauty parlours, hair Rs.	80,000	at	the	time	of	dissolution,	
saloons and small scale activities like but	its	assets	are	Rs.	60,000	only.	In	
running a retail shop in a locality. such a situation the proprietor will 

Sole trader is a type of business unit where a person is solely responsible for 
providing the capital, for bearing the risk of the enterprise and for the management 
of business.

J.L. Hansen
The individual proprietorship is the form of business organisation at the head of 
which stands an individual as one who is responsible, who directs its operations 
and who alone runs the risk of failure.
 L.H. Haney

Features have	to	bring	in	Rs.	20,000	from	her	
Salient characteristics of the sole personal sources even if she has to 
proprietorship form of organisation sell her personal property to repay the 

firm’s	debts.	
are as follows:

(iii) Sole risk bearer and profit 
(i) Formation and closure: There recipient: The risk of failure of 
is no separate law that governs sole business is borne all alone by the sole 
proprietorship. Hardly any legal proprietor. However, if the business 
formalities are required to start a is successful, the proprietor enjoys 
sole proprietary business, though all	 the	 benefits.	 He	 receives	 all	 the	
in some cases one may require a business	profits	which	become	a	direct	
license. Closure of the business can reward for his risk bearing.
also be done easily. Thus, there is 
ease in formation as well as closure (iv) Control: The right to run the 
of business. business and make all decisions lies 

absolutely with the sole proprietor. He 
(ii) Liability: Sole proprietors have can carry out his plans without any 
unlimited liability. This implies that interference from others.

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   28 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 29

(v) No separate entity: In the eyes of (i) Quick decision making: A sole 
the law, no distinction is made between proprietor enjoys considerable degree 
the sole trader and his business, as of freedom in making business 
business does not have an identity decisions. Further the decision making 
separate from the owner. The owner is prompt because there is no need to 
is, therefore, held responsible for all consult others. This may lead to timely 
the activities of the business. capitalisation of market opportunities 
(vi) Lack of business continuity: as and when they arise.

 The 
sale proprietorship business is owned (ii) Confidentiality  of  information: 
and controlled by one person, therefore Sole decision making authority 
death, insanity, imprisonment, enables the proprietor to keep all 
physical ailment or bankruptcy of the the information related to business 
sole proprietor will have a direct and operations	confidential	and	maintain	
detrimental effect on the business secrecy. A sole trader is also not bound 
and may even cause closure of the by	law	to	publish	firm’s	accounts.
business. (iii) Direct incentive: A sole proprietor 
Merits directly	reaps	the	benefits	of	his/her	
Sole proprietorship offers many efforts as he/she is the sole recipient 
advantages. Some of the important of	 all	 the	 profit.	 The	 need	 to	 share	
ones are as follows: profits	does	not	arise	as	he/she	is	the	

A Refreshing Start: Coca Cola Owes its Origin to a Sole Proprietor!
The product that has given the world its best-known taste was born in Atlanta, 
Georgia,	on	May	8,	1886.	Dr.	John	Stith	Pemberton,	a	local	pharmacist,	produced	
the syrup for Coca-Cola®, and carried a jug of the new product down the street to 
Jacobs’ Pharmacy, where it was sampled, pronounced “excellent” and placed on 
sale	for	five	cents	a	glass	as	a	soda	fountain	drink.	Dr.	Pemberton	never	realised	
the potential of the beverage he created. He gradually sold portions of his business 
to various partners and, just prior to his death in 1888, sold his remaining 
interest in Coca-Cola to Asa G. Candler. An Atlantan with great business acumen, 
Mr. Candler proceeded to buy additional business rights and acquire complete 
control. 

On May 1, 1889, Asa Candler published a full-page advertisement in The Atlanta 
Journal, proclaiming his wholesale and retail drug business as “sole proprietors 
of Coca-Cola ... Delicious. Refreshing. Exhilarating. Invigorating.” Sole 
ownership, which Mr. Candler did not actually achieve until 1891, needed an 
investment	of	$	2,300.
It was only in 1892 that Mr. Candler formed a company called The Coca-Cola 
Corporation.
Source: Website of Coca Cola company. 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   29 13-01-2021   09:40:59



30 BUSINESS  STUDIES

single owner. This provides maximum (ii) Limited life of a business 
incentive to the sole trader to work concern: The sole proprietorship 
hard. business is owned and controlled 
(iv) Sense of accomplishment: There by one person, so death, insanity, 
is a personal satisfaction involved in imprisonment, physical ailment or 
working for oneself. The knowledge bankruptcy of a proprietor affects the 
that one is responsible for the success business and can lead to its closure.
of the business not only contributes to (iii) Unlimited liability: A major 
self-satisfaction but also instils in the disadvantage of sole proprietorship is 
individual a sense of accomplishment that the owner has unlimited liability. 
and	confidence	in	one’s	abilities. If the business fails, the creditors can 

recover their dues not merely from 
(v) Ease of formation and closure: An the business assets, but also from the 
important merit of sole proprietorship is personal assets of the proprietor. A 
the possibility of entering into business poor decision or an unfavourable 
with minimal legal formalities. There circumstance can create serious 
is no separate law that governs sole financial	burden	on	the	owner.	That	is	
proprietorship. As sole proprietorship why a sole proprietor is less inclined 
is the least regulated form of business, to take risks in the form of innovation 
it is easy to start and close the business or expansion.
as per the wish of the owner. (iv) Limited managerial ability: The 

owner has to assume the responsibility 
Limitations of varied managerial tasks such as 

purchasing,	selling,	financing,	etc.	It	is	
Not with standing various advantages, rare	to	find	an	individual	who	excels	in	
the sole proprietorship form of all these areas. Thus decision making 
organisation is not free from limitations. may not be balanced in all the cases. 
Some of the major limitations of sole Also, due to limited resources, sole 
proprietorship are as follows: proprietor may not be able to employ 
(i) Limited resources:	 Resources	 of	 and retain talented and ambitious 
a sole proprietor are limited to his/ employees.
her personal savings and borrowings Though sole proprietorship suffers 
from others. Banks and other lending from various shortcomings, many 
institutions may hesitate to extend a entrepreneurs opt for this form of 

organisation because of its inherent 
long term loan to a sole proprietor. advantages. It requires less amount of 
Lack of resources is one of the major capital. It is best suited for businesses 
reasons why the size of the business which are carried out on a small 
rarely grows much and generally scale and where customers demand 
remains small. personalised services.

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   30 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 31

2.3 Joint hindu Family Business birth. It is governed by the Hindu 
Joint Hindu family business is a Succession	Act,	1956.
specific	form	of	business	organisation	 (ii) Liability: The liability of all 
found only in India. It is one of the members except the karta is limited 
oldest forms of business organisation to their share of co-parcenery property 
in the country. It refers to a form of of the business. The karta, however, 
organisation wherein the business is has unlimited liability.
owned and carried on by the members 
of the Hindu Undivided Family (HUF). (iii) Control: The control of the family 
It is governed by the Hindu Law. The business lies with the karta. He takes 
basis of membership in the business is all the decisions and is authorised to 
birth in a particular family and three manage the business.  His decisions 
successive generations can be members are binding on the other members.
in the business. ( iv) Continuity:  The business 

The business is controlled by continues even after the death of 
the head of the family who is the the karta as the next eldest member 
eldest member and is called karta. All takes up the position of karta, leaving 
members have equal ownership right the business stable. The business 
over the property of an ancestor and can, however, be terminated with the 
they are known as co-parceners. mutual consent of the members.

Gender Equality in the Joint Hindu Family a Reality
According	 to	 the	Hindu	Succession	 (Amendment)	Act,	 2005,	 the	daughter	 of	 a	
coparcener of a Joint Hindu Family shall, by birth, become a coparcener. At the 
time of partition of such a ‘Joint Hindu Family’ the coparcenary property shall be 
equally divided to all the coparceners irrespective of their gender (male or female). 
The eldest member (male or female) of ‘Joint Hindu Family’ shall become Karta. 
Married daughter has equal rights in property of a Joint Hindu Family.

Features (v) Minor Members: The inclusion 
The following points highlight the of an individual into the business 
essential characteristics of the joint occurs due to birth in a Hindu 
Hindu family business. Undivided Family. Hence, minors can 
(i) Formation: For a joint Hindu also be members of the business.
family business, there should be at 
least two members in the family and Merits
ancestral property to be inherited by 
them. The business does not require The advantages of the joint Hindu 
any agreement as membership is by family business are as follows:

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   31 13-01-2021   09:40:59



32 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(i) Effective control: The karta has and management of business, but 
absolute decision making power. This also suffers from the disadvantage of 
avoids	 conflicts	 among	members	 as	 having unlimited liability. His personal 
no one can interfere with his right to property can be used to repay business 
decide.  This also leads to prompt and debts.
flexible	decision	making. (iii) Dominance of karta: The karta 
(ii) Continued business existence: individually manages the business 
The death of the karta will not affect which may at times not be acceptable 
the business as the next eldest to other members. This may cause 
member will then take up the position. conflict	amongst	them	and	may	even	
Hence, operations are not terminated lead to break down of the family unit.
and continuity of business is not 
threatened. (iv) Limited managerial skills: 
(iii) Limited liability of members: Since the karta cannot be an expert in 
The liability of all the co-parceners all areas of management, the business 
except the karta is limited to their share may suffer as a result of his unwise 
in the business, and consequently decisions. His inability to decide 
their	risk	is	well-defined	and	precise. effectively	may	result	into	poor	profits	

or even losses for the organisation.
( i v )  I n c r e a s e d  l o y a l t y  a n d 
cooperation: Since the business is The joint Hindu family business 
run by the members of a family, there is on the decline because of the 
is a greater sense of loyalty towards one diminishing number of joint Hindu 
other. Pride in the growth of business families in the country.
is linked to the achievements of the 
family. This helps in securing better 2.4 PartnershiP

cooperation from all the members. The inherent disadvantage of the 
sole	 proprietorship	 in	 financing	 and	

Limitation managing an expanding business 
The following are some of the limitations paved the way for partnership as a 
of a joint Hindu family business. viable option. Partnership serves as an 

answer to the needs of greater capital 
(i) Limited resources: The joint Hindu investment, varied skills and sharing 
family business faces the problem of of risks.
limited capital as it depends mainly The Indian Partnership Act, 1932 
on ancestral property.  This limits the defines	 partnership	 as	 “the	 relation	
scope for expansion of business. between persons who have agreed 
(ii) Unlimited liability of karta: to	 share	 the	 profit	 of	 the	 business 
The karta is burdened not only with carried on by all or any one of them 
the responsibility of decision making acting for all.”

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   32 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 33

Features liable to that extent. Individually too, 
Definitions	 given	 above	 point	 to	 the	 each partner can be held responsible 
following major characteristics of repaying the debts of the business. 
the partnership form of business However, such a partner can later 
organisation. recover from other partners an amount 
(i) Formation: The partnership form of money equivalent to the shares in 
of business organisation is governed liability	defined	as	per	the	partnership	
by the Indian Partnership Act, 1932. agreement.

Partnership is the relation between persons competent to make contracts 
who have agreed to carry on a lawful business in common with a view to 
private gain. 

L H Haney
Partnership is the relation which subsists between persons who have agreed to 
combine	their	property,	labour	or	skill	in	some	business	and	to	share	the	profits	
therefrom between them.

The Indian Contract Act 1872

It comes into existence through a legal (iii) Risk bearing: The partners 
agreement wherein the terms and bear the risks involved in running a 
conditions governing the relationship business as a team. The reward comes 
among the partners, sharing of in	the	form	of	profits	which	are	shared	
profits	and	losses	and	the	manner	of	 by the partners in an agreed ratio. 
conducting	the	business	are	specified.	 However, they also share losses in 
It may be pointed out that the business the	same	ratio	in	the	event	of	the	firm	
must be lawful and run with the motive incurring losses.
of profit. Thus, two people coming 
together for charitable purposes will (iv) Decision making and control: 
not constitute a partnership. The partners share amongst themselves 
(ii) Liability: the responsibility of decision making 

	 The	partners	 of	 a	firm	
have unlimited liability. Personal and control of day to day activities. 
assets may be used for repaying Decisions are generally taken with 
debts in case the business assets are mutual consent. Thus, the activities 
insufficient. Further, the partners of	 a	 partnership	 firm	 are	managed	
are jointly and individually liable for through the joint efforts of all the 
payment of debts. Jointly, all the partners.
partners are responsible for the debts (v) Continuity:  Partnership is 
and they contribute in proportion to characterised by lack of continuity of 
their share in business and as such are business since the death, retirement, 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   33 13-01-2021   09:40:59



34 BUSINESS  STUDIES

insolvency or insanity of any partner (ii) Balanced decision making: The 
can bring an end to the business. partners can oversee different functions 
However, the remaining partners may according to their areas of expertise. 
if they so desire continue the business Because an individual is not forced to 
on the basis of a new agreement. handle different activities, this not only 
(vi )  Number of Partners:  The reduces the burden of work but also 
minimum number of partners needed leads to fewer errors in judgements. As 
to start a partnership firm is two. a consequence, decisions are likely to 
According	 to	 section	 464	 of	 the	 be more balanced.
Companies	 Act	 2013,	 maximum	 (iii) More funds: In a partnership, 
number of partners in a partnership the capital is contributed by a number 
firm	 can	 be	 100,	 subject	 to	 the	 of partners. This makes it possible 
number prescribed by the government. to raise larger amount of funds as 
As	 per	 Rule	 10	 of	 The	 Companies	 compared to a sole proprietor and 
(miscelleneous)	Rules	2014,	at	present	 undertake additional operations when 
the maximum number of members needed.
can	be	50. (iv) Sharing of risks: The risks 
(vii) Mutual agency:	The	definition	of	 involved	in	running	a	partnership	firm	
partnership highlights the fact that it are shared by all the partners. This 
is a business carried on by all or any reduces the anxiety, burden and stress 
one of the partners acting for all. In on individual partners.
other words, every partner is both an (v) Secrecy:	A	partnership	firm	is	not	
agent and a principal. He is an agent of 
other partners as he represents them legally required to publish its accounts 
and thereby binds them through his and submit its reports. Hence it is 
acts.  He is a principal as he too can able to maintain confidentiality of 
be bound by the acts of other partners. information relating to its operations.

Merits Limitations
The following points describe the A partnership firm of business 
advantages	of	a	partnership	firm. organisation suffers from the following 
(i) Ease of formation and closure: A limitations:
partnership	firm	can	be	formed	easily	 (i) Unlimited liability: Partners 
by putting an agreement between are liable to repay debts even from 
the prospective partners into place their personal resources in case the 
whereby they agree to carryout the business	assets	are	not	 sufficient	 to	
business	of	the	firm	and	share	risks.	 meet its debts. The liability of partners 
There is no compulsion with respect to is both joint and several which may 
registration	of	the	firm.	Closure	of	the	 prove to be a drawback for those 
firm	too	is	an easy task. partners who have greater personal 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   34 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 35

wealth. They will have to repay the financial	status	of	a	partnership	firm.	
entire debt in case the other partners As	a	result,	the	confidence	of	the	public	
are unable to do so. in	partnership	firms	is	generally	low.
(ii) Limited resources: There is a 2.4.1 Types of Partners
restriction on the number of partners, 
and hence contribution in terms of A	partnership	firm	can	have	different	
capital investment is usually not types of partners with different roles 
sufficient to support large scale and liabilities. An understanding of 
business operations. As a result, these types is important for a clear 

understanding of their rights and 
partnership	 firms	 face	 problems	 in	 responsibilities. These are described 
expansion beyond a certain size. as follows: 
( i i i )  Possibi l ity of  confl icts: (i) Active partner: An active partner 
Partnership is run by a group of is one who contributes capital, 
persons wherein decision making participates in the management of 
authority is shared. Difference in the	firm,	shares	its	profits	and	losses,	
opinion on some issues may lead to and is liable to an unlimited extent 
disputes between partners. Further, to the creditors of the firm. These 
decisions of one partner are binding partners take actual part in carrying 
on other partners. Thus an unwise out	business	of	the	firm	on	behalf	of	
decision by some one may result in other partners.
financial	 ruin	 for	 all	 others.	 In	 case	 (ii) Sleeping or dormant partner: 
a	 partner	 desires	 to	 leave	 the	 firm,	 Partners who do not take part in the 
this can result in termination of day to day activities of the business 
partnership as there is a restriction are called sleeping partners. A sleeping 
on transfer of ownership. partner, however, contributes capital 
(iv) Lack of continuity: Partnership to the firm, shares its profits and 
comes to an end with the death, losses, and has unlimited liability.
retirement, insolvency or lunacy (iii) Secret partner: A secret partner 
of any partner. It may result in is	one	whose	association	with	the	firm	
lack of continuity. However, the is unknown to the general public. 
remaining partners can enter into a Other than this distinct feature, in 
fresh agreement and continue to run all other aspects he is like the rest of 
the business. the partners. He contributes to the 
(v) Lack of public confidence: A capital	of	 the	firm,	 takes	part	 in	 the	
partnership	firm	is	not	legally	required	 management,	 shares	 its	 profits	 and	
to	publish	its	financial	reports	or	make	 losses, and has unlimited liability 
other related information public. It towards the creditors.  
is,	therefore,	difficult	for	any	member	 (iv) Nominal partner: A nominal 
of the public to ascertain the true partner is one who allows the use of 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   35 13-01-2021   09:40:59



36 BUSINESS  STUDIES

his/her	name	by	a	firm,	but	does	not	 partners, even though they do not 
contribute to its capital. He/she does contribute capital or take part in 
not take active part in managing the its	management.	 Suppose	Rani	 is	 a	
firm,	does	not	share	its	profit	or	losses	 friend of Seema who is a partner in a 
but is liable, like other partners, to the software	firm	—Simplex	Solutions.	On	
third parties, for the repayments of the Seema’s	 request,	 Rani	 accompanies	
firm’s	debts.	 her to a business meeting with Mohan 
(v) Partner by estoppel: A person Softwares and actively participates in 
is considered a partner by estoppel the negotiation process for a business 
if, through his/her own initiative, deal and gives the impression that 
conduct or behaviour, he/she gives she is also a partner in Simplex 
an impression to others that he/ Solutions. If credit is extended to 
she is a partner of the firm. Such Simplex Solutions on the basis of these 
partners are held liable for the debts negotiations,	Rani	would	also	be	liable	
of the firm because in the eyes of for repayment of such debt, as if she 
the third party they are considered is	a	partner	of	the	firm.		

Table 2.1    Types of Partners

Type Capital 
contribution Management Share in 

profits/losses Liability

Active partner Contributes Participates in Shares	profits/	 Unlimited 
capital management losses liability

Sleeping or 
dormant Contributes Does not Shares	profits/	 Unlimited 
partner capital participate in 

management losses liability

Participates in 
Secret partner Contributes Shares	profits/	 Unlimited 

capital management, 
but secretly losses liability

Nominal Does not Does not Generally 
partner contribute participate in does not share Unlimited 

capital management profits/losses liability

Partner by Does not Does not Does not share Unlimited 
estoppel contribute participate in 

capital management profits/losses liability

Partner by Does not Does not Does not share Unlimited 
holding out contribute participate in 

capital management profits/losses liability

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   36 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 37

Minor as a Partner
Partnership is based on legal contract between two persons who agree to share the 
profits	or	losses	of	a	business	carried	on	by	them.	As	such	a	minor	is	incompetent	
to	enter	into	a	valid	contract	with	others,	he	cannot	become	a	partner	in	any	firm.	
However,	a	minor	can	be	admitted	to	the	benefits	of	a	partnership	firm	with	the	
mutual consent of all other partners. In such cases, his liability will be limited to 
the	extent	of	the	capital	contributed	by	him	and	in	the	firm.	He	will	not	be	eligible	
to	take	an	active	part	in	the	management	of	the	firm.	Thus,	a	minor	can	share	only	
the	profits	and	can	not	be	asked	to	bear	the	losses.	However,	he	can	if	he	wishes,	
inspect	the	accounts	of	the	firm.	The	status	of	a	minor	changes	when	he	attains	
majority. In fact, on attaining majority, the minor has to decide whether he would 
like	to	become	a	partner	in	the	firm.	He	has	to	give	a	public	notice	of	his	decision	
within six months of attaining majority. If he fails to do so, within the stipulated 
time,	he	will	be	treated	as	a	full-fledged	partner	and	will	become	liable	to	the	debts	
of	the	firm	to	an	unlimited	extent,	in	the	same	way	as	other	active	partners	are.

(vi) Partner by holding out: A ‘partnership at will’ and ‘particular 
partner by ‘holding out’ is a person partnership’. On the basis of liability, 
who	though	is	not	a	partner	in	a	firm	 the two types of partnership include: 
but knowingly allows himself/herself one ‘with limited liability’ and the other 
to be represented as a partner in a one ‘with unlimited liability’. These 
firm.	 Such	 a	 person	 becomes	 liable	 types are described in the following 
to outside creditors for repayment of sections.
any debts which have been extended 
to the firm on the basis of such Classification on the basis of duration
representation. In case he is not 
really a partner and wants to save (i) Partnership at will: This type of 
himself from such a liability, he should partnership exists at the will of the 
immediately issue a denial, clarifying partners. It can continue as long as 
his position that he is not a partner in the partners want and is terminated 
the	firm.	If	he	does	not	do	so,	he	will	 when any partner gives a notice of 
be responsible to the third party for withdrawal from partnership to the 
any such debts. firm.

(ii) Particular partnership: Partner-
2.4.2 Types of Partnerships ship formed for the accomplishment of 
Partnerships	can	be	classified	on	the	 a particular project say construction of 
basis of two factors, viz., duration a building or an activity to be carried 
and liability. On the basis of duration, on	for	a	specified	time	period	is	called	
there can be two types of partnerships : particular partnership. It dissolves 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   37 13-01-2021   09:40:59



38 BUSINESS  STUDIES

automatically when the purpose for This form of partnership was 
which it was formed is fulfilled or when not permitted in India earlier. The 
the time duration expires. permission to form partnership firms 

with limited liability has been granted 
Classification on the basis of liability after introduction of New Small 

Enterprise Policy in 1991. The idea 
(i) General Partnership: In general behind such a move has been to enable 
partnership, the liability of partners the partnership firms to attract equity 
is unlimited and joint. The partners capital from friends and relatives of 
enjoy the right to participate in the small scale entrepreneurs who were 
management of the firm and their earlier reluctant to help, due to the 
acts are binding on each other as existence of unlimited liability clause 
well as on the firm. Registration of in the partnership form of business.
the firm is optional. The existence 
of the firm is affected by the death, 2.4.3 Partnership Deed
lunacy, insolvency or retirement of A partnership is a voluntary association 
the partners. of people who come together for 
(ii) Limited Partnership: In limited achieving common objectives. In order 
partnership, the liability of at least to enter into partnership, a clear 

agreement with respect to the terms, 
one partner is unlimited whereas the conditions and all aspects concerning 
rest may have limited liability. Such a the partners is essential so that there 
partnership does not get terminated is no misunderstanding later among 
with the death, lunacy or insolvency the partners. Such an agreement 
of the limited partners. The limited can be oral or written. Even though 
partners do not enjoy the right of it is not essential to have a written 
management and their acts do not agreement, it is advisable to have a 
bind the firm or the other partners. written agreement as it constitutes 
Registration of such partnership is an evidence of the conditions agreed 
compulsory. upon. The written agreement which 

Price Waterhouse Coopers was a Partnership Firm earlier
Price Waterhouse Coopers, one of the world’s top accountancy firms has been 
created in 1998 by the merger of two companies, Price Waterhouse and Coopers 
and Lybrand — each with historical roots going back some 150 years to the 19th 
century Great Britain. In 1850, Samuel Lowell Price set up his accounting business 
in London. In 1865, he was joined in partnership by William H. Holyland and 
Edwin Waterhouse. As the firm grew, qualified members of its professional staff 
were admitted to the partnership. By the late 1800s, Price Waterhouse had gained 
significant recognition as an accounting firm. Trace the journey of this partnership 
firm and prepare a report.
Source: Price Waterhouse Coopers archives in Columbia University.

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   38 18-04-2024   11:26:11



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 39

specifies	the	terms	and	conditions	that	 (a)	 	 A	partner	of	an	unregistered	firm	
govern the partnership is called the cannot	file	a	suit	against	the	firm	
partnership deed.  or other partners,

The partnership deed generally 
includes the following aspects: 	 (b)	 The	firm	cannot	file	a	suit	against	
•	 Name	of	firm third parties, and 
•	 Nature of business and location 	 (c)	 The	firm	cannot	file	a	case	against	

of business the partners.
•	 Duration of business In view of these consequences, it is 
•	 Investment made by each partner therefore advisable to get the firm 
•	 Distribution	of	profits	and	losses registered. According to the India 
•	 Duties and obligations of the Partnership Act 1932, the partners 

partners may	get	 the	firm	registered	with	 the 
•	 Salaries and withdrawals of the Registrar	of	firms	of	the	state	in	which	

partners the	firm	is	situated.	The	registration	
•	 Terms governing admission, can be at the time of formation or at 

retirement and expulsion of a any time during its existence. The 
partner procedure	for	getting	a	firm	registered	

•	 Interest on capital and interest is as follows:
on drawings 1.  Submission of application in the 

•	 Procedure for dissolution of the prescribed	form	to	the	Registrar	of	
firm firms.	The	application	should	con-

•	 Preparation of accounts and their tain the following particulars:
auditing •	 Name	of	the	firm

•	 Method of solving disputes •	 Location	of	the	firm
•	 Names of other places where the 

2.4.4 Registration firm	carries	on	business	
Registration	 of	 a	 partnership	 firm	 •	 The date when each partner 
means	the	entering	of	the	firm’s	name,	 joined	the	firm
along with the relevant prescribed •	 Names and addresses of the 
particulars,	 in	 the	Register	 of	 firms	 partners
kept	 with	 the	 Registrar	 of	 Firms.	 •	 Duration of partnership
It provides conclusive proof of the This application should be signed by 
existence	of	a	partnership	firm. all the partners.

It is optional for a partnership 2.  Deposit of required fees with the 
firm	to	get	registered.	 In	case	a	firm	 Registrar	of	Firms.
does not get registered, it is deprived 3.		The	 Registrar	 after	 approval	 will	
of	many	benefits.	 The	 consequences	 make an entry in the register of 
of	 non-registration	 of	 a	 firm	 are	 as	 firms	and	will	subsequently	issue	a	
follows: certificate	of	registration.

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   39 13-01-2021   09:41:00



40 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Cooperative is a form of organisation wherein persons voluntarily associate together 
as human beings on the basis of equality for the promotion of an economic interest 
for themselves. 

  E. H. Calvert
Cooperative organisation is “a society which has its objectives for the promotion of 
economic interests of its members in accordance with cooperative principles.

The Indian Cooperative Societies Act 1912

2.5   cooPerative society cooperative society, and can also leave 
The word cooperative means working anytime as per his desire. There cannot 
together and with others for a common be any compulsion for him to join or 
purpose. quit a society. Although procedurally 

The cooperative society is a a member is required to serve a notice 
voluntary association of persons, who before leaving the society, there is 
join together with the motive of welfare no compulsion to remain a member. 
of the members. They are driven by the Membership is open to all, irrespective 
need to protect their economic interests of their religion, caste, and gender. 
in the face of possible exploitation at (ii) Legal status:	 Registration	 of	 a	
the hands of middlemen obsessed with cooperative society is compulsory. 
the	desire	to	earn	greater	profits. This accords a separate identity to 

The  cooperat ive  soc ie ty  i s the society which is distinct from its 
compulsorily required to be registered members. The society can enter into 
under the Cooperative Societies Act contracts and hold property in its 
1912. The process of setting up a name, sue and be sued by others. As a 
cooperative society is simple enough result of being a separate legal entity, 
and at the most what is required it is not affected by the entry or exit of 
is the consent of at least ten adult its members.
persons to form a society. The capital (iii) Limited liability: The liability of 
of a society is raised from its members the members of a cooperative society 
through issue of shares. The society is limited to the extent of the amount 
acquires a distinct legal identity after contributed by them as capital. This 
its registration. defines the maximum risk that a 

member can be asked to bear.
Features

(iv) Control: In a cooperative society, 
The characteristics of a cooperative the power to take decisions lies in 
society are listed below. the hands of an elected managing 
(i) Voluntary membership: The committee. The right to vote gives 
membership of a cooperative society the members a chance to choose 
is voluntary. A person is free to join a the members who will constitute the 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   40 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 41

managing committee and this lends services to the society. As the focus 
the cooperative society a democratic is on elimination of middlemen, this 
character. helps in reducing costs. The customers 
(v) Service motive: The cooperative or producers themselves are members 
society through its purpose lays of the society, and hence the risk of 
emphasis on the values of mutual bad debts is lower. 
help and welfare. Hence, the motive of (v) Support from government: The 
service dominates its working. If any cooperative	society	exemplifies	the	idea	
surplus is generated as a result of its of	democracy	and	hence	finds	support	
operations, it is distributed amongst from the Government in the form of 
the members as dividend in conformity low taxes, subsidies, and low interest 
with the bye-laws of the society. rates on loans.

(vi) Ease of formation: The cooperative 
Merits society can be started with a minimum 
The cooperative society offers many of ten members. The registration 
benefits	to	its	members.	Some	of	the	 procedure is simple involving a few legal 
advantages of the cooperative form of formalities. Its formation is governed 
organisation are as follows. by the provisions of Cooperative 

Societies Act 1912. 
(i) Equality in voting status:  The 
principle of ‘one man one vote’ governs Limitations
the cooperative society. Irrespective of 
the amount of capital contribution by The cooperative form of organisation 
a member, each member is entitled to suffers from the following limitations:
equal voting rights. (i) Limited resources:	Resources	of	a	
(ii) Limited liability: The liability of cooperative society consists of capital 
members of a cooperative society is contributions of the members with 
limited to the extent of their capital limited means. The low rate of dividend 
contribution. The personal assets of offered on investment also acts as a 
the members are, therefore, safe from deterrent in attracting membership or 
being used to repay business debts. more capital from the members.

( i i i )  Stable existence: (ii) Inefficiency in management: 
 Death, Cooperative societies are unable to 

bankruptcy or insanity of the members attract and employ expert managers 
do not affect continuity of a cooperative because of their inability to pay them 
society. A society, therefore, operates high salaries. The members who offer 
unaffected by any change in the honorary services on a voluntary 
membership. basis are generally not professionally 
(iv) Economy in operations: The equipped to handle the management 
members generally offer honorary functions effectively.

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   41 13-01-2021   09:41:00



42 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(iii) Lack of secrecy: As a result may take a backseat if personal gain is 
of open discussions in the meetings given preference by certain members.
of members as well as disclosure 
obligations as per the Societies Act (7), 2.5.1 Types of Cooperative 
it	is	difficult	to	maintain	secrecy	about	 Societies
the operations of a cooperative society. Various types of cooperative societies 
( iv )  Government  contro l :  In based on the nature of their operations 
return of the privileges offered by the are described below:
government, cooperative societies (i) Consumer’s cooperative societies: 
have to comply with several rules The consumer cooperative societies 
and regulations related to auditing are formed to protect the interests of 
of accounts, submission of accounts, consumers. The members comprise 
etc. Interference in the functioning of consumers desirous of obtaining 
of the cooperative organisation good quality products at reasonable 
through the control exercised by prices. The society aims at eliminating 
the state cooperative departments middlemen to achieve economy in 
also negatively affects its freedom of operations. It purchases goods in 
operation. bulk directly from the wholesalers and 
(v) Differences of opinion: Internal sells goods to the members, thereby 
quarrels arising as a result of contrary eliminating	 the	middlemen.	 Profits,	
viewpoints	may	lead	to	difficulties	in	 if any, are distributed on the basis 
decision making. Personal interests of either their capital contributions 
may start to dominate the welfare to the society or purchases made by 
motive	and	the	benefit	of	other	members	 individual members.

Amul’s amazing Cooperative ventures!
Every	day	Amul	collects	4,47,000	litres	of	milk	from	2.12	million	farmers	(many	
illiterate), converts the milk into branded, packaged products, and delivers goods 
worth	Rs.	6	crore	(Rs.	60	million)	to	over	5,00,000	retail	outlets	across	the	country.

It	all	started	in	December	1946	with	a	group	of	farmers	keen	to	free	themselves	
from intermediaries, gain access to markets and thereby ensure maximum returns 
for their efforts. Based in the village of Anand, the Khera District Milk Cooperative 
Union (better known as Amul) expanded exponentially. It joined hands with other 
milk	cooperatives,	and	the	Gujarat	network	now	covers	2.12	million	farmers,	10,411	
village level milk collection centres and fourteen district level plants (unions). Amul 
is the common brand for most product categories produced by various unions: 
liquid milk, milk powder, butter, ghee, cheese, cocoa products, sweets, ice-cream 
and condensed milk. Amul’s sub-brands include variants such as Amulspray, 
Amulspree, Amulya and Nutramul. 
Source: Adapted from Pankaj Chandra, “Rediff.com”, Business Special, September 2005.

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   42 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 43

(ii) Producer’s cooperative societies: society aims to eliminate middlemen 
These societies are set up to protect and improve competitive position of 
the interest of small producers. The its members by securing a favourable 
members comprise of producers market for the products. It pools 
desirous of procuring inputs for the output of individual members 
production of goods to meet the and performs marketing functions 
demands of consumers. The society like transportation, warehousing, 
aims	to	fight	against	the	big	capitalists	 packaging, etc., to sell the output 
and enhance the bargaining power at the best possible price. Profits 
of the small producers. It supplies are distributed according to each 
raw materials, equipment and other member’s contribution to the pool of 
inputs to the members and also buys output.
their	output	for	sale.	Profits	among	the	
members are generally distributed on (iv) Farmer’s cooperative societies: 
the basis of their contributions to the These societies are established to 
total pool of goods produced or sold protect the interests of farmers by 
by the society. providing better inputs at a reasonable 

cost. The members comprise farmers 
(iii) Marketing cooperative societies: who wish to jointly take up farming 
Such societies are established to activities. The aim is to gain the 
help small producers in selling their benefits	 of	 large	 scale	 farming	 and	
products. The members consist increase the productivity. Such 
of producers who wish to obtain societies provide better quality seeds, 
reasonable prices for their output. The fertilisers, machinery and other 

Indian Companies in League of FORTUNE 
GLOBAL Organisations 

GLOBAL  Rank in Revenue 
Company

rank India (Crores)

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. 117 2 5,35,793

Reliance	Industries	Ltd. 106 1 5,80,553

Tata Motors Ltd. 265 5 3,03,227

State Bank of India 236 4 3,30,687

ONGC 160 3 4,36,057

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   43 13-01-2021   09:41:00



44 BUSINESS  STUDIES

modern techniques for use in the business activities and has a legal 
cultivation of crops. This helps not status independent of its members. 
only in improving the yield and returns A company can be described as an 
to the farmers, but also solves the artificial person having a separate 
problems associated with the farming legal entity, perpetual succession and 
on fragmented land holdings. a common seal. The company form 
(v) Credit cooperative societies: of organisation is governed by The 
Credit cooperative societies are Companies	Act,	2013.	As	per	section	
established for providing easy credit 2(20)	of	Act	2013,	a	company	means	
on reasonable terms to the members. company incorporated under this Act 
The members comprise of persons who or any other previous company law. 
seek	financial	help	in	the	form	of	loans.	 The shareholders are the owners 
The aim of such societies is to protect of the company while the Board of 
the members from the exploitation Directors is the chief managing body 
of lenders who charge high rates of elected by the shareholders. Usually, 
interest on loans. Such societies provide the owners exercise an indirect control 
loans to members out of the amounts over the business. The capital of the 
collected as capital and deposits from company is divided into smaller parts 
the members and charge low rates called ‘shares’ which can be transferred 
of interest. freely from one shareholder to another 

person (except in a private company).
 (vi) Cooperative housing societies: 
Cooperative housing societies are Features
established to help people with 
limited income to construct houses The	definition	of	a	joint	stock	company	
at reasonable costs. The members of highlights the following features of a 
these societies consist of people who company.
are desirous of procuring residential (i)  Artificial person: A company is a 
accommodation at lower costs. The creation of law and exists independent 
aim is to solve the housing problems of its members. Like natural persons, 
of the members by constructing houses a company can own property, incur 
and giving the option of paying in debts, borrow money, enter into 
instalments. These societies construct contracts, sue and be sued but unlike 
flats	 or	provide	plots	 to	members	 on	 them it cannot breathe, eat, run, talk 
which the members themselves can and so on. It is, therefore, called an 
construct the houses as per their artificial	person.
choice. 

(ii) Separate legal entity: From the 
2.6 Joint stock comPany day of its incorporation, a company 

acquires an identity, distinct from its 
A company is an association of members. Its assets and liabilities are 
persons formed for carrying out separate from those of its owners. The 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   44 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 45

law does not recognise the business directors hold a position of immense 
and owners to be one and the same. significance as they are directly 
(iii) Formation: The formation of accountable to the shareholders for 
a company is a time consuming, the working of the company. The 
expensive and complicated process. shareholders, however, do not have the 
It involves the preparation of several right to be involved in the day-to-day 
documents and compliance with running of the business.

Previous	Company	law	means	any	of	the	laws	specified	below:
	 1.	 Act	relating	to	companies	in	force	before	the	Indian	companies	Act,	1866	(10	

of	1866).	
	 2.	 The	Indian	companies	Act,	1866	(10	of	1866).
	 3.	 The	Indian	companies	Act,	1882	(6	of	1882).
	 4.	 The	Indian	companies	Act,	1913	(6	of	1913).
	 5.	 The	Registration	of	Transferred	Companies	Ordinance,	1942	(ordinance	42	

of 1942).
	 6.	 The	Companies	Act,	1956.

several legal requirements before it (vi) Liability: The liability of the 
can start functioning.  Incorporation members is limited to the extent of 
of companies is compulsory under the capital contributed by them in a 
The	Companies	 Act	 2013	 or	 any	 of	 company. The creditors can use only 
the previous company law, as state the assets of the company to settle their 
earlier. Such companies which are 
incorporated under companies Act claims since it is the company and not 
1956	 or	 any	 company	 law	 shall	 be	 the members that owes the debt. The 
included in the list of companies. members can be asked to contribute 

to the loss only to the extent of the 
(iv) Perpetual succession: A company 
being a creation of the law, can be unpaid amount of share held by them. 
brought to an end only by law. It will Suppose Akshay is a shareholder in a 
only	 cease	 to	 exist	 when	 a	 specific	 company	holding	2,000	shares	of	Rs.10	
procedure for its closure, called each	on	which	he	has	already	paid	Rs.	
winding up, is completed. Members 7 per share. His liability in the event 
may come and members may go, but of losses or company’s failure to pay 
the company continues to exist. debts	can	be	only	up	to	Rs.	6,000	—	the	
(v) Control: The management and unpaid	amount	of	his	share	capital	(Rs.	
control of the affairs of the company is 3	per	share	on	2,000	shares	held	in	the	
undertaken by the Board of Directors, company). Beyond this, he is not liable 
which appoints the top management to pay anything towards the debts or 
officials	for	running	the	business.	The	 losses of the company.

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   45 13-01-2021   09:41:00



46 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(vii) Common seal: The company can be sold in the market and as such 
being an articial person cannot sign can be easily converted into cash 
its name by itself. Therefore, every in case the need arises. This avoids 
company is required to have its own blockage of investment and presents 
seal	which	 acts	 as	 official	 signature	 the company as a favourable avenue 
of the company. Any document which for investment purposes.
does not carry the common seal of (iii) Perpetual existence: Existence of 
the company is not a binding on the a company is not affected by the death, 
company. retirement, resignation, insolvency 
 (viii) Risk bearing: The risk of losses or insanity of its members as it has 
in a company is borne by all the share a separate entity from its members. 
holders. This is unlike the case of sole A company will continue to exist 
proprietorship or partnership firm even if all the members die. It can be 
where one or few persons respectively liquidated only as per the provisions 
bear	the	losses.	In	the	face	of	financial	 of	the	Companies	Act,	2013.
difficulties, all shareholders in a ( iv)  Scope for expansion:  As 
company have to contribute to the compared to the sole proprietorship and 
debts to the extent of their shares in partnership forms of organisation, a 
the company’s capital. The risk of loss company	has	large	financial	resources.	
thus gets spread over a large number Further, capital can be attracted from 
of shareholders. the public as well as through loans from 

banks	and	financial	institutions.	Thus	
Merits there is greater scope for expansion. 
The company form of organisation The investors are inclined to invest in 
offers a multitude of advantages, some shares because of the limited liability, 
of which are discussed below. transferable ownership and possibility 

of high returns in a company.
(i) Limited liability: The shareholders 
are liable to the extent of the amount (v) Professional management: 
unpaid on the shares held by them. A company can af ford to pay 
Also, only the assets of the company higher salaries to specialists and 
can be used to settle the debts, leaving professionals. It can, therefore, employ 

people who are experts in their area of 
the owner’s personal property free from specialisations. The scale of operations 
any charge. This reduces the degree of in a company leads to division of 
risk borne by an investor. work. Each department deals with a 
(ii) Transfer of interest: The ease particular activity and is headed by an 
of transfer of ownership adds to the expert. This leads to balanced decision 
advantage of investing in a company as making	as	well	as	greater	efficiency	in	
the share of a public limited company the company’s operations.

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   46 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 47

Limitations various certificates from different 
The major limitations of a company agencies, viz., registrar, SEBI, etc. This 
form of organisation are as follows: reduces the freedom of operations of a 

company and takes away a lot of time, 
(i) Complexity in formation: The effort and money.
formation of a company requires 
greater time, effort and extensive (v) Delay in decision making: 
knowledge of legal requirements and Companies are democratically managed 
the procedures involved. As compared through the Board of Directors which 
to sole proprietorship and partnership is followed by the top management, 
form of organisations, formation of a middle management and lower level 
company is more complex. management. Communication as 
(ii) Lack of secrecy: The Companies well as approval of various proposals 
Act requires each public company may cause delays not only in taking 
to provide from time-to-time a lot of decisions but also in acting upon 
information	to	the	office	of	the	registrar	 them.  
of companies. Such information is (vi) Oligarchic management: In 
available to the general public also. theory, a company is a democratic 
It	 is,	 therefore,	 difficult	 to	maintain	 institution wherein the Board of 
complete secrecy about the operations Directors are representatives of the 
of company. shareholders who are the owners. In 
(iii) Impersonal work environment: practice, however, in most large sized 
Separat ion o f  ownership  and organisations having a multitude 
management leads to situations in of shareholders; the owners have 
which there is lack of effort as well minimal inf luence in terms of 
as personal involvement on the controlling or running the business. 
part	 of	 the	 officers	 of	 a	 company.	 It is so because the shareholders are 
The large size of a company further spread all over the country and a very 
makes it difficult for the owners small percentage attend the general 
and top management to maintain meetings. The Board of Directors as 
personal contact with the employees, such enjoy considerable freedom in 
customers and creditors. exercising their power which they 
(iv) Numerous regulations: The sometimes use even contrary to 
functioning of a company is subject the interests of the shareholders. 
to  many legal  provis ions and Dissatisfied	 shareholders	 in	 such	 a	
compulsions. A company is burdened situation have no option but to sell 
with numerous restrictions in respect their shares and exit the company. As 
of aspects including audit, voting, the directors virtually enjoy the rights 
filing	 of	 reports	 and	 preparation	 of	 to take all major decisions, it leads to 
documents, and is required to obtain rule by a few. 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   47 13-01-2021   09:41:00



48 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(vii) Conflict in interests: There  (b) has a minimum of 2 and a maximum 
may	 be	 conflict	 of	 interest	 amongst	 of	 200	members,	 excluding	 the	
various stakeholders of a company. present and past employees;
The employees, for example, may 
be interested in higher salaries,  (c) does not invite public to subscribe 
consumers desire higher quality to its securities and  
products at lower prices, and the It is necessary for a private company 
shareholders want higher returns in to use the word private limited after its 
the form of dividends and increase name. If a private company contravenes 

any of the aforesaid provisions, it 
in the intrinsic value of their shares. ceases to be a private company and 
These demands pose problems in loses all the exemptions and privileges 
managing the company as it often to which it is entitled.
becomes difficult to satisfy such The following are some of the privileges 
diverse interests. of a private limited company as against 
2.6.1 Types of Companies a public limited company:

1. A private company can be formed 
A company can be either a private or 
a public company. These two types of by only two members whereas 
companies are discussed in detail in seven people are needed to form 
the following paragraphs. a public company.

2. There is no need to issue a pro-
Private Company spectus as public is not invited to 
A private company means a company subscribe to the shares of a pri-

vate company.
which: 3. Allotment of shares can be done 
 (a) restricts the right of members to without receiving the minimum 

transfer its shares; subscription. A private limited 

Table 2.3    Difference between a Public Company and Private Company
Basis Public company Private company

Members Minimum - 7 Minimum - 2
Maximum - unlimited Maximum	-	200

Minimum number of 
directors Three Two

Index of members Compulsory Not compulsory
Transfer of shares No restriction Restriction	on	transfer

Invitation to public to Can invite the public to Cannot invite the public 
subscribe to shares subscribe to its shares or to subscribe to its 

debentures securities 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   48 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 49

company can start business as  (b) has no restriction on transfer 
soon	as	it	receives	the	certificate	 securities; and
of incorporation.  (c) is not prohibited from inviting 

4. A private company needs to have the public to subscribe to its 
only two directors as against the securities.
minimum of three directors in the However, a private company which is a 
case of a public company. Howev- subsidiary of a public company is also 
er the maximum number of direc- treated as a public company.
tors for both types of companies 
is	fifteen. 2.7 choice oF Form oF Business 

5.	 A	private	company	is	not	required	 organisation 
to keep an index of members 
while the same is necessary in After studying various forms of business 
the case of a public company. organisations, it is evident that each 

form has certain advantages as well as 
Public Company disadvantages. It, therefore, becomes 

vital that certain basic considerations 
A public company means a company 
which is not a private company. As per are kept in mind while choosing an 
The Companies Act, a public company appropriate form of organisation. The 
is one which: important factors determining the 
 (a) has a minimum of 7 members and choice of organisation are listed in 

no limit on maximum members; Table 2.4 and are discussed as follows:

Table 2.4     Factors influencing the choice of 
       form of Business Organisation

Form of organisation
Factor Most advantageous Least advantageous

Availability of capital Company Sole proprietorship
Cost of formation Sole proprietorship Company
Ease of formation Sole proprietorship Company

Transfer of ownership Company (except private company) Partnership
Managerial skills Company Sole proprietorship

Regulations Sole proprietorship Company
Flexibility Sole proprietorship Company
Continuity Company Sole proprietorship
Liability Company Sole proprietorship

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   49 13-01-2021   09:41:00



50 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(i) Cost and ease in setting up the is affected by such events as death, 
organisation: As far as initial business insolvency or insanity of the owners. 
setting-up costs are concerned, sole However, such factors do not affect the 
proprietorship is the most inexpensive continuity of business in the case of 
way of starting a business. However, organisations like joint Hindu family 
the legal requirements are minimum business, cooperative societies and 
and the scale of operations is small. companies. In case the business needs 
In case of partnership also, the a permanent structure, company 
advantage of less legal formalities and form is more suitable. For short 
lower cost is there because of limited term ventures, proprietorship or 
scale of operations. Cooperative partnership may be preferred.
societies and companies have to be (iv) Management ability: A sole 
compulsorily registered. Formation proprietor may find it difficult to 
of a company involves a lengthy and have expertise in all functional areas 
expensive legal procedure. From the of management. In other forms of 
point of view of initial cost, therefore, organisations like partnership and 
sole proprietorship is the preferred company, there is no such problem. 

Division of work among the members 
form as it involves least expenditure. in such organisations allows the 
Company form of organisation, on managers to specialise in specific 
the other hand, is more complex and areas, leading to better decision 
involves greater costs. making. But this may lead to situations 
( i i )  Liabil ity:  In case of  so le of	 conflicts	because	 of	 differences	 of	
proprietorship	and	partnership	firms,	 opinion amongst people. Further, if the 
the liability of the owners/partners organisation’s operations are complex 
is unlimited. This may call for paying in nature and require professionalised 
the debt from personal assets of management, company form of 
the owners. In joint Hindu family organisation is a better alternative. 
business, only the karta has unlimited Proprietorship or partnership may be 
liability. In cooperative societies and suitable, where simplicity of operations 
companies, however, liability is limited allow even people with limited skills 
and creditors can force payment of to run the business. Thus, the 
their claims only to the extent of the nature of operations and the need for 
company’s assets. Hence, from the professionalised management affect 
point of view of investors, the company the choice of the form of organisation.
form of organisation is more suitable (v) Capital considerations: Companies 
as the risk involved is limited. are in a better position to collect 
(iii) Continuity: The continuity of sole large amounts of capital by issuing 
proprietorship	and	partnership	firms	 shares to a large number of investors. 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   50 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 51

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   51 13-01-2021   09:41:00

Table 2.5    Comparative Evaluation of Forms of Organisation

Basis of Sole nt Hindu Cooperative 
comparison proprietorship Partnership Joi

family business society Company

Minimal legal Less legal 
on	is	 formalities, Registration	 Registration	compulsory,

Formation formalities, Registrati
easiest optional, exemption from compulsory,

formation easy formation registration, greater legal lengthy and expensive 

easy formation formalities formation process

At least two Minimum Private-2
persons for At	least	10	 Public Company-7

Members Only owner Minimum-2 division of family adults, Maximum
Maximum:	50 property, no maximum Private	Company-200

no maximum limit Public Company-
limit unlimited

Limited but 
more than 

Capital that can be Ancestral 
contribution Limited	finance raised in property Limited Large	financial	resources

case of sole 
proprietorship

Liability Unlimited Unlimited and Unlimited 
joint (Karta), Limited Limited Limited

(Other members)

Owner takes all Partners take Elected 
Control and decisions, decisions, representative, Separation between 
management quick decision consent of all Karta takes i.e., managing ownership and 

making partners is decisions committee management
needed takes decisions

Unstable, More stable Stable business, 
Continuity business and but affected continues even if Stable because 

owner regarded by status of karta dies of separate Stable because of 
us

as one partners legal status separate legal stat



52 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Partnership firms also have the (vii) Nature of business: If direct 
advantage of combined resources of personal contact is needed with the 
all partners. But the resources of a sole customers such as in the case of a 
proprietor are limited. Thus, if the scale grocery store, proprietorship may be 
of operations is large, company form 
may be suitable whereas for medium more suitable. For large manufacturing 
and small sized business one can opt units, however, when direct personal 
for partnership or sole proprietorship. contact with the customer is not required, 
Further, from the point of view of the company form of organisation may 
expansion, a company is more suitable be adopted. Similarly, in cases where 
because of its capability to raise more services of a professional nature are 
funds and invest in expansion plans. It required, partnership form is much 
is precisely for this purpose that in our more suitable. 
opening case Neha’s father suggested It would not be out of place to 
she should consider switching over to 
the company form of organisation. mention here that the factors stated 

above are inter-related. Factors like 
(vi) Degree of control: If direct capital contribution and risk vary with 
control over operations and absolute the size and nature of business, and 
decision making power is required, hence a form of business organisation 
proprietorship may be preferred. But if 
the owners do not mind sharing control that is suitable from the point of view 
and decision making, partnership or of the risks for a given business when 
company form of organisation can be run on a small scale might not be 
adopted. The added advantage in the appropriate when the same business is 
case of company form of organisation carried on a large scale. It is, therefore, 
is that there is complete separation suggested that all the relevant factors 
of ownership and management and it must be taken into consideration while 
is  professionals who are appointed to making a decision with respect to the 
independently manage the affairs of form of organisation that should be 
a company. adopted.

Key Terms

Sole proprietorship Partnership Joint Hindu Family
Mutual agency Cooperative Societies Joint Stock Company
Perpetual	succession	 Artificial	person	 Holding	company	
Co-parceners Incorporation of a Company  
 

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   52 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 53

SUMMARY

Forms of business organisation refers to the types of organisations which 
differ in terms of ownership and management. The major forms of organisation 
include proprietorship, partnership, joint Hindu family business, cooperative 
society and company.
Sole proprietorship refers to a form of organisation where business is owned, 
managed and controlled by a single individual who bears all the risks and is 
the	only	recipient	of	all	the	profits.	Merits	of	this	form	of	organisation	include	
quick decision making, direct incentive, personal satisfaction, and ease of 
formation and closure. But this form of organisation suffers from limitations 
of limited resources, unstable life span of business, unlimited liability of sole 
proprietor and his/her limited managerial ability.
Partnership	 is	defined	as	an	association	of	two	or	more	persons	who	agree	
to	carry	on	a	business	 together	and	share	 the	profits	as	well	as	bear	 risks	
collectively. Major advantages of partnership are: ease of formation and 
closure,	benefits	of	specialisation,	greater	funds,	and	reduction	of	risk.	Major	
limitations	of	partnership	are	unlimited		liability,	possibility	of	conflicts,	lack	
of	 continuity	 and	 lack	 of	 public	 confidence.	 As	 there	 are	 different	 types	 of	
partners such as active, sleeping, secret and nominal partners; so is the case 
with types of partnerships which can vary from general partnership, limited 
partnership, partnership at will to particular partnership.
Joint Hindu family business is a business owned and carried on by the 
members of a Hindu Undivided Family, which is governed by the Hindu law. 
Karta — the oldest male member of the family — controls the business. The 
strong points of joint Hindu family business include effective control, stability 
in existence, limited liability and increased loyalty among family members. But 
this form of organisation too suffers from certain limitations such as limited 
resources, lack of incentives, dominance of the karta and limited managerial 
ability.
A cooperative society is a voluntary association of persons who get together to 
protect their economic interests. The major advantages of a cooperative society 
are equality in voting, members’ limited liability, stable existence, economy in 
operations, support from government, and ease of formation. But this form of 
organisation	suffers	from	weaknesses	such	as	limited	resources,	inefficiency	
in management, lack of secrecy, government control, and differences among 
members in regard to the way society should be managed and organised. Based 
on their purpose and nature of members, various types of societies that can be 
formed include: consumers cooperative society, producers cooperative society, 
marketing cooperative society, farmers cooperative society, credit cooperative 
society, and cooperative housing society.

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   53 13-01-2021   09:41:00



54 BUSINESS  STUDIES

A company,	on	the	other	hand,	may	be	defined	as	an	artificial	person,	existing	
only in the eyes of the law with perpetual succession and having a separate 
legal	 identity.	 While	 major	 advantages	 of	 a	 company	 form	 of	 organisation	
are members’ limited liability, transfer of interest, stable existence, scope for 
expansion, and professional management; its key limitations are: complexity 
in formation, lack of secrecy, impersonal work environment, numerous 
regulations,	delay	in	decision	making,	oligarchic	management,	and	conflict	of	
interests among different shareholders.
Companies can be of two types — private and public. A private company is one 
which restricts transfer of shares and does not invite the public to subscribe 
to its securities. A public company, on the other hand, is allowed to raise its 
funds by inviting the public to subscribe to its securities. Furthermore, there 
is a free transferability of securities in the case of a public company.
Choice of form of organisation: Selection of an appropriate form of 
organisation can be made after taking various factors into consideration. 
Initial costs, liability, continuity, capital considerations, managerial ability, 
degree of control and nature of business are the key factors that need to taken 
into account while deciding about the suitable form of organisation for one’s 
business.

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1. Compare the status of a minor in a Joint Hindu family business with that 

in	a	partnership	firm.
2. If	registration	is	optional,	why	do	partnership	firms	willingly	go	through	this	

legal	formality	and	get	themselves	registered?	Explain.	
3. State the important privileges available to a private company.
4. How	 does	 a	 cooperative	 society	 exemplify	 democracy	 and	 secularism?	

Explain.
5.	 What	is	meant	by	‘partner	by	estoppel’?	Explain.
6.	 Briefly	explain	the	following	terms	in	brief.

(a)   Perpetual succession    (b)   Common seal  
(c)   Karta	 	 	 	 (d)			Artificial	person

Long Answer Questions
1. What	do	you	understand	by	a	sole	proprietorship	firm?	Explain	its	merits	

and	limitation?

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   54 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 55

2. Why	is	partnership	considered	by	some	to	be	a	relatively	unpopular	form	
of	business	ownership?	Explain	the	merits	and	limitations	of	partnership.	

3. Why	is	it	important	to	choose	an	appropriate	form	of	organisation?	Discuss	
the factors that determine the choice of form of organisation.

4. Discuss the characteristics, merits and limitation of cooperative form of 
organisation.	Also	describe	briefly	different	types	of	cooperative	societies.

5.	 Distinguish between a Joint Hindu family business and partnership.
6.	 Despite limitations of size and resources, many people continue to prefer 

sole	proprietorship	over	other	forms	of	organisation?		Why?

Application Questions
1. In which form of organisation is a trade agreement made by one owner 

binding	on	the	others?	Give	reasons	to	support	your	answer.
2. The	business	assets	of	an	organisation	amount	to	Rs.	50,000	but	the	debts	

that	remain	unpaid	are	Rs.		80,000.		What	course	of	action	can	the	creditors	
take if
(a)	 The	organisation	is	a	sole	proprietorship	firm
(b)	 The	 organisation	 is	 a	 partnership	 firm	with	 Anthony	 and	 Akbar	 as	

partners.	Which	of	 the	 two	partners	 can	 the	 creditors	 approach	 for	
repayment	of	debt?	Explain	giving	reasons

3. Kiran is a sole proprietor. Over the past decade, her business has grown 
from operating a neighbourhood corner shop selling accessories such as 
artificial	jewellery,	bags,	hair	clips	and	nail	art	to	a	retail	chain	with	three	
branches in the city. Although she looks after the varied functions in all the 
branches, she is wondering whether she should form a company to better 
manage the business. She also has plans to open branches countrywide.
(a)	 Explain	two	benefits	of	remaining	a	sole	proprietor
(b)	 Explain	two	benefits	of	converting	to	a	joint	stock	company
(c)	 What	role	will	her	decision	to	go	nationwide	play	in	her	choice	of	form	

of	the	organisation?
(d)	 What	legal	formalities	will	she	have	to	undergo	to	operate	business	as	

a	company?

Projects
Divide students into teams to work on the following

(a)	 To	 study	 the	 profiles	 of	 any	 five	 neighbourhood	 grocery/stationery	
store

(b) To conduct a study into the functioning of a Joint Hindu family 
businesses

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   55 13-01-2021   09:41:00



56 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(c)	 To	enquire	into	the	profile	of	five	partnerships	firms
(d) To study the ideology and working of cooperative societies in the area
(e)	 To	study	the	profiles	of	any	five	companies	(inclusive	of	both	private	

and public companies)

Assignments
1. Sonam and Sameer decided to begin a food processing business in District 

Kangra of Himachal Pradesh.  Help them in developing the partnership deed 
to avoid any dispute in future. 

Notes
1. Some of the following aspects can be assigned to the students for undertaking 

above mentioned studies.
2. Nature of business, size of the business measured in terms of capital 

employed, number of persons working, or sales turnover, problems faced, 
Incentive, reason behind choice of a particular form, decision making 
pattern, willingness to expand and relevant considerations, Usefulness of 
a form, etc.

3. Students	 teams	 should	 be	 encouraged	 to	 submit	 their	 findings	 and	
conclusions in the form of project reports and multi-media presentations. 

4. The specimen partnership deed is available as e-resource in the embedded 
QR	code.

2024-25

Chapter 2.indd   56 13-01-2021   09:41:00