C h a p t e r

 6 Societal Impacts

“I think computer viruses should 
count as life. I think it says 
something about human nature 
that the only form of life we have 
created so far is purely destructive. 
We’ve created life in our own 
image.”

—  Stephen Hawking

In this chapter
» Introduction
» Digital Footprints

6.1 IntroductIon » Digital Society and 
Netizen

In recent years, the world around us has 
seen a lot of changes due to use of ‘Digital » Data Protection
Technologies’. These changes have made a » Creative Commons
dramatic impact on our lives, making things » Cyber Crime
more convenient, faster, and easier to handle. » Indian Information 
In the past, a letter would take days to reach, Technology Act (IT Act)
and every recipient would get his or her own » E-waste: Hazards and 
copy and respond separately. Today, one can Management
send and receive emails to more than one » Impact on Health
person at a time. The instantaneous nature 
of electronic communications has made us 
more efficient and productive.

From the banking industry to aviation, 
industrial production to e-commerce, 
especially with regard to the delivery of their 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   167 10/9/2020   12:36:45 PM



168 InformatIcs PractIces

goods and services, all are now dependent on the use 
of computers and digital technologies. Applications 
of digital technologies have redefined and evolved all 
spheres of human activities. Today more and more people 

 are using digital technologies through smartphones, 
computers, etc., with the help of high speed Internet. 

Why did the digital technologies become so 
widespread? The introduction of personal computers 
(PCs) and Internet followed by smartphones has brought 
these technologies to the common man. 

While we reap the benefits of digital technologies, 
these technologies can also be misused. Let’s look at 
the impact of these technologies on our society and the 
best practices that can ensure a productive and safe 
digital environment for us. 

6.2 dIgItal FootprInts

Have you ever searched online for any information? 
Have you ever purchased an online ticket, or responded 

to your friend’s email, or checked the score of a 
game online? Whenever we surf the Internet using 
smartphones, tablets, computers, etc., we leave a 
trail of data reflecting the activities performed by us 
online, which is our digital footprint. 

Our digital footprint can be created and used with 
or without our knowledge. It includes websites we 
visit, emails we send, and any information we submit 
online, etc., along with the computer’s IP address, 
location, and other device specific details. Such data 
could be used for targeted advertisement or could 
also be misused or exploited. Thus, it is good to be 
aware of the data trail we might be leaving behind. 
This awareness should make us cautious about what 
we write, upload or download or even browse online.

There are two kinds of digital footprints we leave 
behind. Active digital footprints which includes data 
that we intentionally submit online. This would 
include emails we write, or responses or posts we 
make on different websites or mobile Apps, etc. The 
digital data trail we leave online unintentionally is 

Figure 6.1: Exemplar web called passive digital footprints. This includes the 
applications that result in data generated when we visit a website, use a mobile 

digital footprints App, browse Internet, etc. as shown in Figure 6.1 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   168 10/9/2020   12:36:54 PM



 Societal impactS 169

Everyone who is connected to the Internet may have 
a digital footprint. With more usage, the trail grows. On 
examining the browser settings, we can find out how it Think and Reflect
stores our browsing history, cookies, passwords, auto 
fills, and many other types of data. Can your digital 

Besides browser, most of our digital footprints are footprints be used to 
stored in servers where the applications are hosted. judge your attitude 

and work ethics?
We may not have access to remove or erase that data, 
neither do we have any control on how that data will 
be used. Therefore, once a data trail is generated, even 
if we later try to erase data about our online activities, 
the digital footprints still remain. There is no guarantee 
that digital footprints will be fully eliminated from the 
Internet. Therefore, we need to be more cautious while 
being online! All our online activities leave a data trace 
on the Internet as well as on the computing device that 
we use. This can be used to trace the user, their location, 
device and other usage details.

6.3 dIgItal socIety and netIzen
As our society is inclined towards using more and 
more digital technologies, we end up managing most 
of our tasks digitally. In this era of digital society, our 
daily activities like communication, social networking, 
banking, shopping, entertainment, education, Activity 6.1
transportation, etc., are increasingly being driven by As a digital citizen, list  
online transactions. various services that 

Digital society thus reflects the growing trend of you avail online.
using digital technologies in all spheres of human 
activities. But while online, all of us need to be aware 
of how to conduct ourselves, how best to relate with 
others and what ethics, morals and values to maintain. 
Anyone who uses digital technology along with Internet 
is a digital citizen or a netizen. Being a good netizen 
means practicing safe, ethical and legal use of digital 
technology. A responsible netizen must abide by 
net etiquettes, communication etiquettes and social 
media etiquettes.
6.3.1 Net Etiquettes
We follow certain etiquettes during our social 
interactions. Similarly, we need to exhibit proper 
manners and etiquettes while being online as shown 
in Figure 6.2. One should be ethical, respectful and 
responsible while surfing the Internet.

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   169 10/9/2020   12:36:54 PM



170 InformatIcs PractIces

(A) Be Ethical 
• No copyright violation: we should not 

use copyrighted materials without the 
permission of the creator or owner. As 
an ethical digital citizen, we need to be 
careful while streaming audio or video 
or downloading images and files from 
the Internet. We will learn more about 
copyright in Section 6.4.

• Share the expertise: it is good to share 
information and knowledge on Internet 
so that others can access it. However, 
prior to sharing information, we need to 
be sure that we have sufficient knowledge 

Figure 6.2: Net etiquettes on that topic. The information shared 
should be true and unambiguous. Also, 
in order to avoid redundant information, 
we should verify that the information is 
not available already on Internet.

(B) Be Respectful 
• Respect privacy: as good digital citizens we 

have the right to privacy and the freedom of 
While surfing the personal expression. At the same time, we have 

Internet, we should to understand that other digital citizens also 
be cautious about 
our personal and have the same rights and freedoms. Our personal 
confidential data. communication with a digital citizen may include 

√ Think before images, documents, files, etc., that are private 
sharing credentials to both. We should respect this privacy and 
with others on an should not share those images, documents, files, 
online platform. etc., with any other digital citizen without each 

√ Keep personal others’ consent.
information safe • Respect diversity: in a group or public forum, 
and protected we should respect the diversity of the people 
through 
passwords. in terms of knowledge, experience, culture and 

other aspects.

(C) Be Responsible
• Avoid cyber bullying: any insulting, degrading 

or intimidating online behaviour like repeated 
posting of rumours, giving threats online, 
posting the victim’s personal information, sexual 
harassment or comments aimed to publicly 
ridicule a victim is termed as cyber bullying. 
It implies repeatedly targeting someone with 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   170 10/9/2020   12:36:54 PM



 Societal impactS 171

intentions to hurt or embarrass. Perhaps new or 
non-frequent users of the Internet feel that things 
done online have no effect in the real world. We Activity 6.2
need to realise that bullying online can have very Find out how to report 
serious implications on the other person (victim). about an abusive or 
Also, remember our actions can be traced back inappropriate post or 
using our digital footprints. about a sender in a 

• Don’t feed the troll: an Internet troll is a person social network.

who deliberately sows discord on the Internet by 
starting quarrels or upsetting people, by posting 
inflammatory or off topic messages in an online 
community, just for amusement. Since trolls thrive 
on attention, the best way to discourage trolls is 
not to pay any attention to their comments.

6.3.2 Communication Etiquettes
Digital communication includes email, texting, instant 
messaging, talking on the cell phone, audio or video 
conferencing, posting on forums, social networking 
sites, etc. All these are great ways to connect with people 
in order to exchange ideas, share data and knowledge. 
Good communication over email, chat room and other 
such forums require a digital citizen to abide by the 
communication etiquettes as shown in Figure 6.3.

Communication Etiquettes

Be Be 
Precise Polite

Respect Respect 
Time  Data Be 

Limits Credible   
Avoid Spam!!
On receiving 

junk email (called 
Figure 6.3: Communication etiquettes Spam), neither 

reply nor open any 
(A) Be Precise attachment in such 

• Respect time: we should not waste precious time email. 

in responding to unnecessary emails or comments 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   171 10/9/2020   12:36:54 PM



172 InformatIcs PractIces

unless they have some relevance for us. Also, we 
No Permanent should not always expect an instant response as 

Deletion!! the recipient may have other priorities. 
We can post or 

comment anything on • Respect data limits: For concerns related to data 
Internet, and delete it and bandwidth, very large attachments may be 

later. avoided. Rather send compressed files or link of 
√ But remember, the files through cloud shared storage like Google 

it cannot be Drive, Microsoft OneDrive, Yahoo Dropbox, etc.
permanently 
deleted. It is (B) Be Polite
recorded in our 
Digital Footprint. Whether the communication is synchronous (happening 

√ This is how in real time like chat, audio/video calls) or asynchronous 
many culprits (like email, forum post or comments), we should be 
who spread hate, polite and non-aggressive in our communication. We 
bully others should avoid being abusive even if we don’t agree with 
or engage in 
criminal activities others’ point of view. 
are traced and 
apprehended. (C) Be Credible

We should be cautious while making a comment, 
replying or writing an email or forum post as such acts 
decide our credibility over a period of time. That is how 
we decide to follow some particular person’s forum posts 
while ignoring posts of other members of the forum. On 
various discussion forums, we usually try to go through 
the previous comments of a person and judge their 
credibility before relying on that person’s comments.
6.3.3 Social Media Etiquettes
In the current digital era, we are familiar with different 
kinds social media and we may have an account on 
Facebook, Google+, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, 
or YouTube channel. Social media are websites or 
applications that enable their users to participate in 
social networking by creating and sharing content with 
others in the community. These platforms encourage 
users to share their thoughts and experiences through 
posts or pictures. In this way users can interact with 
other online users of those social media apps or channels. 
This is why the impact and outreach of social media has 
grown exponentially. It has begun to shape the outcome 
of politics, business, culture, education and more. In 
social media too, there are certain etiquettes we need to 
follow as shown in Figure 6.4.

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   172 10/9/2020   12:36:54 PM



 Societal impactS 173

Choose password wisely Don’t Meet Up!!
Know who you befriend √ Never arrange to 

meet an online 
Beware of fake information friend because it 

may not be safe. 
√ No matter how 

Think before you upload genuine someone 
is appearing 
online, 

Figure 6.4: Social media etiquettes they might be 
pretending and 

(A) Be Secure hiding their real 
• Choose password wisely: it is vital for social identity.

network users. News of breaching or leakage of user 
data from social network often attracts headlines. 
Users should be wary of such possibilities and 
must know how to safeguard themselves and 
their accounts. The minimum one can do is to 
have strong and frequently changed password. 
Never share personal credentials like username 
and password with others. 

• Know who you befriend: social networks usually 
encourage connecting with users (making friends), Think and Reflect
sometime even those whom we don’t know or have 
not met. However, we need to be careful while Is having the same 
befriending unknown people as their intentions password for all your 
possibly could be malicious and unsafe. accounts on different 

websites safe?
• Beware of fake information: fake news, messages 

and posts are common in social networks. As a 
user, we should be aware of them. With experience, 
we should be able to figure out whether a news, 
message or post is genuine or fake. Thus, we 
should not blindly believe in everything that we 
come across on such platforms, we should apply 
our knowledge and experience to validate such 
news, message or post. 

(B) Be Reliable Play Safe!!
• Think before uploading: we can upload almost Think carefully before 

anything on social network. However, remember sharing personal 
that once uploaded, it is always there in the photos.
remote server even if we delete the files. Hence we 
need to be cautious while uploading or sending 
sensitive or confidential files which have a bearing 
on our privacy.

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   173 10/9/2020   12:36:54 PM



174 InformatIcs PractIces

6.4 data protectIon

Activity 6.3 In this digital age, data or information protection 
is mainly about the privacy of data stored digitally. 

Suppose someone's Elements of data that can cause substantial harm, 
email password is 
'technology', which is embarrassment, inconvenience and unfairness to an 
weak. Can you suggest individual, if breached or compromised, is called sensitive 
a stronger password? data. Examples of sensitive data include biometric 

information, health information, financial information, 
or other personal documents, images or audios or 
videos. Privacy of sensitive data can be implemented by 
encryption, authentication, and other secure methods 
to ensure that such data is accessible only to the 
authorised user and is for a legitimate purpose.

Think and Reflect All over the world, each country has its own data 
protection policies (laws). These policies are legal 

Why should we always 
mention the source documents that provide guidelines to the user on 
from which we got an processing, storage and transmission of sensitive 
idea or used resources information. The motive behind implementation of 
(text, image, audio, these policies is to ensure that sensitive information is 
video, etc.) to prepare a appropriately protected from modification or disclosure. 
project or a writeup?

6.4.1 Intellectual Property Right (IPR)
When someone owns a house or a motorcycle, we 
say that the person owns that property. Similarly, 
if someone comes out with a new idea, this original 
idea is that person’s intellectual property. Intellectual 
Property refers to the inventions, literary and artistic 
expressions, designs and symbols, names and logos. 
The ownership of such concepts lies with the creator, 

Executing IPR: say or the holder of the intellectual property. This enables 
for a software the creator or copyright owner to earn recognition or 

√ Code of the financial benefit by using their creation or invention. 
software will be Intellectual Property is legally protected through 
protected by 
a copyright copyrights, patents, trademarks,etc. 

√ Functional (A) Copyright 
expression of Copyright grants legal rights to creators for their original 
the idea will be 
protected by a works like writing, photograph, audio recordings, video, 
patent sculptures, architectural works, computer software, 

√ The name and and other creative works like literary and artistic work. 
logo of the Copyrights are automatically granted to creators and 
software will come authors. Copyright law gives the copyright holder a set 
under a registered of rights that they alone can avail legally. The rights 
trademark include right to copy (reproduce) a work, right to create 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   174 10/9/2020   12:36:54 PM



 Societal impactS 175

derivative works based upon it, right to distribute copies 
of the work to the public, and right to publicly display 
or perform the work. It prevents others from copying, 
using or selling the work. For example, writer Rudyard Activity 6.4

Kipling holds the copyright to his novel, ‘The Jungle Explore the following 
Book’, which tells the story of Mowgli, the jungle boy. websites to know 
It would be an infringement of the writer’s copyright if about open/public 

licensing:
someone used parts of the novel without permission. To 
use other’s copyrighted material, one needs to obtain a (i) creativecommons.

org for CC, and 
license from them. (ii) gnu.org for GNU 
(B) Patent GPL.
A patent is usually granted for inventions. Unlike 
copyright, the inventor needs to apply (file) for patenting 
the invention. When a patent is granted, the owner gets 
an exclusive right to prevent others from using, selling, 
or distributing the protected invention. Patent gives full 
control to the patentee to decide whether or how the 
invention can be used by others. Thus it encourages 
inventors to share their scientific or technological 
findings with others. A patent protects an invention for 
20 years, after which it can be freely used. Recognition 
and/or financial benefit foster the right environment, and Only the copyright 

owner of a work can 
provide motivation for more creativity and innovation. enter into a license 
(C) Trademark agreement.

Trademark includes any visual symbol, word, name, 
design, slogan, label, etc., that distinguishes the 
brand or commercial enterprise, from other brands 
or commercial enterprises. For example, no company 
other than Nike can use the Nike brand to sell shoes or End User License 
clothes. It also prevents others from using a confusingly Agreement (EULA) 
similar mark, including words or phrases. For example, contains the dos 
confusing brands like “Nikke” cannot be used. However, and don’ts with 

respect to the 
it may be possible to apply for the Nike trademark for software being 
unrelated goods like notebooks. purchased. It 

covers all clauses of 
6.4.2 Licensing software purchase, 
We have studied about copyright in the previous section. viz., how many 
Licensing and copyrights are two sides of the same coin. copies can be 

installed, whether 
A license is a type of contract or a permission agreement source is available, 
between the creator of an original work permitting whether it can 
someone to use their work, generally for some price; be modified and 
whereas copyright is the legal rights of the creator for the redistributed and 
protection of original work of different types. Licensing so on.

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   175 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



176 InformatIcs PractIces

is the legal term used to describe the terms under which 
Beware!! people are allowed to use the copyrighted material. We 

√ Plagiarism means will limit our study to software licensing in this chapter.
using other’s work A software license is an agreement that provides 
and not giving 
adequate citation legally binding guidelines pertaining to the authorised 
for use. use of digital material. The digital material may include 

√ Copyright any software or any form of art, literature, photos, 
infringement etc., in digital form. Any such resource posted on the 
means using Internet constitutes intellectual property and must 
another person’s be downloaded, used or distributed according to the 
work, without 
permission or guidelines given in the license agreement. Failure to 
without paying follow such guidelines is considered as an infringement of 
for it, if it is being Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), and is a criminal offence.
sold.

6.4.3 Violation of IPR
Violation of intellectual property right may happen in 
one of the following ways:

(A) Plagiarism 
With the availability of Internet, we can instantly copy 
or share text, pictures and videos. Presenting someone 
else’s idea or work as one’s own idea or work is called 
plagiarism. If we copy some contents from Internet, 
but do not mention the source or the original creator, 
then it is considered as an act of plagiarism. Further, if 
someone derives an idea or a product from an already 
existing idea or product, but instead presents it as a 
new idea, then also it is plagiarism. It is a serious ethical 
offense and sometimes considered as an act of fraud. 
Even if we take contents that are open for public use, 
we should cite the author or source to avoid plagiarism. 

(B)  Copyright Infringement
Copyright infringement is when we use other person’s 
work without obtaining their permission to use or we 
have not paid for it, if it is being sold. Suppose we 
download an image from the Internet and use it in our 
project. But if the owner of the copyright of the image 
does not permit its free usage, then using such an image 
even after giving reference of the image in our project is a 
violation of copyright. Just because it is on the Internet, 
does not mean that it is free for use. Hence, check the 
copyright status of writer’s work before using it to avoid 
copyright infringement.

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   176 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



 Societal impactS 177

(C) Trademark Infringement
Trademark Infringement means unauthorised use of Remember
other’s trademark on products and services. An owner √ CC licenses are 
of a trademark may commence legal proceedings against a set of copyright 
someone who infringes its registered trademark. licenses that give 

the recipients, 
6.4.4 Public Access and Open Source Software rights to copy, 

modify and 
Copyright sometimes put restriction on the usage of redistribute the 
the copyrighted works by anyone else. If others are creative material, 
allowed to use and built upon the existing work, it but giving the 
will encourage collaboration and would result in new authors, the 

liberty to decide 
innovations in the same direction. Licenses provide the conditions 
rules and guidelines for others to use the existing work. of licensing. 
When authors share their copyrighted works with others √ GPL is the most 
under public license, it allows others to use and even widely used free 
modify the content. Open source licenses help others to software license 
contribute to existing work or project without seeking which grants the 
special individual permission to do so. recipients, rights 

to copy, modify 
The GNU General Public License (GPL) and the and redistribute 

Creative Commons (CC) are two popular categories of the software 
public licenses. CC is used for all kind of creative works and that the 
like websites, music, film, literature, etc. CC enables same rights are 

preserved in all 
the free distribution of an otherwise copyrighted work. derivative works.
It is used when an author wants to give people the right 
to share, use and build upon a work that they have 
created. GPL is primarily designed for providing public 
licence to a software. GNU GPL is another free software 
license, which provides end users the freedom to run, 
study, share and modify the software, besides getting 
regular updates. 

Users or companies who distribute GPL licensed 
works may charge a fee for copies or give them free of 
charge. This distinguishes the GPL license from freeware 
software licenses like Skype, Adobe Acrobat reader, 
etc. that allow copying for personal use but prohibit 
commercial distribution, or proprietary licenses where 
copying is prohibited by copyright law.

Many of the proprietary software that we use are sold 
commercially and their program code (source code) are 
not shared or distributed. However, there are certain 
software available freely for anyone and their source 
code is also open for anyone to access, modify, correct 
and improve. Free and open source software (FOSS) 
has a large community of users and developers who are 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   177 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



178 InformatIcs PractIces

notes contributing continuously towards adding new features 
or improving the existing features. For example, Linux 
kernel-based operating systems like Ubuntu and Fedora 
come under FOSS. Some of the popular FOSS tools are 
office packages, like Libre Office, browser like Mozilla 
Firefox, etc.

Software piracy is the unauthorised use or distribution 
of software. Those who purchase a license for a copy of 
the software do not have the rights to make additional 
copies without the permission of the copyright owner. It 
amounts to copyright infringement regardless of whether 
it is done for sale, for free distribution or for copier’s 
own use. One should avoid software piracy. Using a 
pirated software not only degrades the performance of a 
computer system, but also affects the software industry 
which in turn affects the economy of a country. 

6.5 creatIve commons

Creative Commons is a non-profit organisation (https://
creativecommons.org/) that aims to build a publically 
accessible global platform where a range of creative and 
academic works are shared freely. Any one across the 
globe can access them, share them, and even use them 
for creating their own work out of it without infringing the 
copyright or Intellectual Property rights of the owners. 
In fact, it gives proper attribution to the owners.

The Creative Commons organisation provides 
Creative Commons (CC) licenses free of charge. It allows 
owners of a work to grant copyright permissions for their 
creative and/or academic works in a free, simple and 
standardised way. A CC license is a type of copyright 
license that enables the free distribution of anybody’s 
copyrighted work.  This license is used when an author 
wants to give others the right to share, use and extend 
the work done by them.  The work licensed under CC 
is governed by the Copyright law and so applies to all 
types of work including art, music, literature, dramatics, 
movies, images, educational resources, photographs 
and software. The CC Search feature of the online 
platform makes the licensed material easier to find. The 
author of the content is given full freedom to set up 
conditions to use their work. The owner of a work can 
combine these conditions to create six different types of 
CC licenses, as listed in Table 6.1. 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   178 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



 Societal impactS 179

Table 6.1 Creative Commons (CC) Licenses
License Name Symbolic License icon Description

name
Attribution CC BY This license lets others distribute, remix, 

tweak, and build upon your work, even 
commercially, as long as they credit you for 
the original creation.

Attribution- CC BY-SA This license lets others remix, tweak, and 
ShareAlike build upon your work even for commercial 

purposes, as long as they credit you and 
license their new creations under the identical 
terms.

Attribution- CC BY-ND This license lets others reuse the work for any 
NoDerivs purpose, including commercially; however, it 

cannot be shared with others in adapted form, 
and credit must be provided to you.

Attribution- CC BY-NC This license lets others remix, tweak, and 
NonCommercial build upon your work non-commercially, 

and although their new works must also 
acknowledge you and be non-commercial.

Attribution- CC BY-NC-SA This license lets others remix, tweak, and 
NonCommercial- build upon your work non-commercially, as 
ShareAlike long as they credit you and license their new 

creations under the identical terms.
Attribution- CC BY-NC-ND This license is the most restrictive of our 
NonCommercial- six main licenses, only allowing others to 
NoDerivs download your works and share them with 

others as long as they credit you, but they 
can’t change them in any way or use them 
commercially.

6.6 cyber crIme 
Criminal activities or offences carried out in a digital 
environment can be considered as cyber crime. In such 
crimes, either the computer itself is the target or the 
computer is used as a tool to commit a crime. Cyber 
crimes are carried out against either an individual, or Remember!!
a group, or an organisation or even against a country, 
with the intent to directly or indirectly cause physical Cyber crime is defined 

as a crime in which 
harm, financial loss or mental harassment. A cyber computer is the 
criminal attacks a computer or a network to reach other medium of crime 
computers in order to disable or damage data or services. (hacking, phishing, 
Apart from this, a cyber criminal may spread viruses and spamming), or the 
other malwares in order to steal private and confidential computer is used 

as a tool to commit 
data for blackmailing and extortion. A computer virus is crimes (extortion, data 
some lines of malicious code that can copy itself and can breaches, theft).
have detrimental effect on the computers, by destroying 
data or corrupting the system. Similarly, malware is 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   179 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



180 InformatIcs PractIces

a software designed to specifically gain unauthorised 
access to computer systems. The nature of criminal 

Activity 6.5 activities are alarmingly increasing day-by-day, with 
How can you frequent reports of hacking, ransomware attacks, 
unsubscribe from a denial-of-service, phishing, email fraud, banking fraud 
mail group or block an and identity theft.
email sender?

6.6.1 Hacking
Hacking is the act of unauthorised access to a computer, 
computer network or any digital system. Hackers usually 
have technical expertise of the hardware and software. 
They look for bugs to exploit and break into the system. 

Hacking, when done with a positive intent, is called 
ethical hacking. Such ethical hackers are known as 
white hat hackers. They are specialists in exploring 
any vulnerability or loophole by during testing of the 
software. Thus, they help in improving the security of 
a software. An ethical hacker may exploit a website in 
order to discover its security loopholes or vulnerabilities. 
He then reports his findings to the website owner. Thus, 
ethical hacking is actually preparing the owner against 
any cyber attack.

A non-ethical hacker is the one who tries to gain 
unauthorised access to computers or networks in order 
to steal sensitive data with the intent to damage or 
bring down systems. They are called black hat hackers 
or crackers. Their primary focus is on security cracking 
and data stealing. They use their skill for illegal or 
malicious purposes. Such hackers try to break through 
system securities for identity theft, monetary gain, to 
bring a competitor or rival site down, to leak sensitive 

Beware !! information, etc. 
Accepting links from 6.6.2 Phishing and Fraud Emails

untrusted emails 
can be hazardous, as Phishing is an unlawful activity where fake websites or 
they may potentially emails that look original or authentic are presented to 

contain a virus or link the user to fraudulently collect sensitive and personal 
to malicious website. 
We should ensure to details, particularly usernames, passwords, banking 

open any email link or and credit card details. The most common phishing 
attachment only when method is through email spoofing where a fake or 

it is from a trusted forged email address is used and the user presumes 
source and doesn’t it to be from an authentic source. So you might get an 

look doubtful. email from an address that looks similar to your bank 
or educational institution, asking for your information, 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   180 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



 Societal impactS 181

but if you look carefully you will see their URL address 
is fake. They will often use logo’s of the original, making 
them difficult to detect from the real! Phishing attempts 
through phone calls or text messages are also common 
these days.

(A) Identity Theft
Identity thieves increasingly use personal information 
stolen from computers or computer networks, to commit 
fraud by using the data gained unlawfully. A user’s 
identifiable personal data like demographic details, 
email ID, banking credentials, passport, PAN, Aadhaar 
number and various such personal data are stolen and 
misused by the hacker on behalf of the victim. This Activity 6.6
is one type of phishing attack where the intention is 
largely for monetary gain. There can be many ways in Explore and find out 

how to file a complaint 
which the criminal takes advantage of an individual’s with the cyber cell in 
stolen identity. Given below are a few examples: your area.

• Financial identity theft: when the stolen identity is 
used for financial gain.

• Criminal identity theft: criminals use a victim’s 
stolen identity to avoid detection of their 
true identity.

• Medical identity theft: criminals can seek medical 
drugs or treatment using a stolen identity.

6.6.3 Ransomware
This is another kind of cyber crime where the attacker 
gains access to the computer and blocks the user from 
accessing, usually by encrypting the data. The attacker 
blackmails the victim to pay for getting access to the 
data, or sometimes threatens to publish personal and 
sensitive information or photographs unless a ransom 
is paid.

Ransomware can get downloaded when the users 
visit any malicious or unsecure websites or download 
software from doubtful repositories. Some ransomware 
are sent as email attachments in spam mails. It can 
also reach our system when we click on a malicious 
advertisement on the Internet.
6.6.4 Combatting and Preventing Cyber Crime
The challenges of cyber crime can be mitigated with 
the twin approach of being alert and taking legal help. 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   181 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



182 InformatIcs PractIces

Following points can be considered as safety measures 
Digital signatures to reduce the risk of cyber crime:
are the digital • Take regular backup of important data.
equivalent of a • Use an antivirus software and keep it updated 
paper certificate. 
Digital signatures always.
work on a unique • Avoid installing pirated software. Always download 
digital ID issued software from known and secure (HTTPS) sites.
by an Certificate 
Authority (CA) to • Always update the system software which include 
the user. Signing a the Internet browser and other application software
document digitally • Do not visit or download anything from untrusted 
means attaching websites.
that user's identify, 
which can be used • Usually the browser alerts users about doubtful 
to authenticate. websites whose security certificate could not be 
 A licensed verified; avoid visiting such sites.
Certifying Authority 
(CA) who has been • Use strong password for web login, and change 
granted a license it periodically. Do not use same password for 
to issue it under all the websites. Use different combinations 
Section 24 of the of alphanumeric characters including special 
Indian IT-Act 2000, characters. Ignore common words or names 
can issue the digital 
signature. in password.

• While using someone else’s computer, don’t allow 
browser to save password or auto fill data, and try 
to browse in your private browser window.

• For an unknown site, do not agree to use cookies 
when asked for through a Yes/No option.

• Perform online transaction like shopping, ticketing, 
and other such services only through well-known 
and secure sites.

• Always secure wireless network at home with 
strong password and regularly change it. 

6.7 IndIan InFormatIon technology act (It act)
With the growth of Internet, many cases of cyber crimes, 
frauds, cyber attacks and cyber bullying are reported. 
The nature of fraudulent activities and crimes keeps 
changing. To deal with such menaces, many countries 
have come up with legal measures for protection of 
sensitive personal data and to safeguard the rights 
of Internet users. The Government of India’s The 
Information Technology Act, 2000 (also known as IT 
Act), amended in 2008, provides guidelines to the user 
on the processing, storage and transmission of sensitive 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   182 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



 Societal impactS 183

information. In many Indian states, there are cyber 
cells in police stations where one can report any cyber California Law 
crime. The act provides legal framework for electronic University has 

identified non-
governance by giving recognition to electronic records functioning cathode 
and digital signatures. The act outlines cyber crimes ray tubes (CRTs) 
and penalties for them. from televisions and 

Cyber Appellate Tribunal has been established computer monitors 
to resolve disputes arising from cyber crime, such as as hazardous.

tampering with computer source documents, hacking 
the computer system, using password of another person, 
publishing sensitive personal data of others without 
their consent, etc. The act is needed so that people can 
perform transactions over the Internet through credit 
cards without fear of misuse. Not only people, the act 
empowers government departments also to accept filing, 
creation and storage of official documents in the digital 
format.

6.8 e-waste: hazards and management

E-waste or Electronic waste includes electric or 
electronic gadgets and devices that are no longer in use. 
Hence, discarded computers, laptops, mobile phones, 
televisions, tablets, music systems, speakers, printers, 
scanners etc. constitute e-waste when they are near or 
end of their useful life.

E-waste is becoming one of the fastest growing 
environmental hazards in the world today.  The 
increased use of electronic equipment has also caused 
an exponential increase in the number of discarded 
products. Lack of awareness and appropriate skill 
to manage it has further worsened the problem. So, Leaching is the 

Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) is process of removing 
a substance from 

becoming a major concern for all countries across the another substance 
world. Globally, e-waste constitutes more than 5 per by passing water 
cent of the municipal solid waste. Therefore, it is very through it.
important that e-waste is disposed of in such a manner 
that it causes minimum damage to the environment 
and society.  
6.8.1 Impact of e-waste on environment
To some extent, e-waste is responsible for the degradation 
of our environment. Whether it is emission of gases and 
fumes into the atmosphere, discharge of liquid waste 
into drains or disposal of solid e-waste materials, all of 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   183 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



184 InformatIcs PractIces

this contributes to environmental pollution in some way 
or the other. 

When e-waste is carelessly thrown or dumped in 
landfills or dumping grounds, certain elements or 
metals used in production of electronic products cause 
air, water and soil pollution. This is because when these 
products come in contact with air and moisture, they 
tend to leach. As a result, the harmful chemicals seep 
into the soil, causing soil pollution. Further, when these 
chemicals reach and contaminate the natural ground 
water, it causes water pollution as the water becomes 
unfit for humans, animals and even for agricultural use. 
When dust particles loaded with heavy metals enters 
the atmosphere, it causes air pollution as well. 
6.8.2 Impact of e-waste on humans
As mentioned before, the electrical or electronic devices 
are manufactured using certain metals and elements 
like lead, beryllium, cadmium, plastics, etc. Most of 
these materials are difficult to recycle and are considered 
to be toxic and carcinogenic. If e-waste is not disposed 

Carcinogenic: May of in proper manner, it can be extremely harmful to 
cause cancer humans, plants, animals and the environment as 

discussed below:
• One of the most widely used metals in electronic 

devices (such as monitors and batteries) is lead. 
When lead enters the human body through 
contaminated food, water, air or soil, it causes lead 
poisoning which affects the kidneys, brain and 
central nervous system. Children are particularly 
vulnerable to lead poisoning.

• When e-waste such as electronic circuit boards are 
burnt for disposal, the elements contained in them 
create a harmful chemical called beryllium which 
causes skin diseases, allergies and an increased 
risk of lung cancer. Burning of insulated wires to 
extract copper can cause neurological disorders.

• Some of the electronic devices contain mercury 
which causes respiratory disorders and 
brain damage.

• The cadmium found in semiconductors and 
resistors can damage kidneys, liver and bones. 

• None of the electronic devices are manufactured 
without using plastics. When this plastic reacts 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   184 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



 Societal impactS 185

with air and moisture, it passes harmful chemicals 
into the soil and water resources. When consumed, 
it damages the immune system of the body and also 
causes various psychological problems like stress 
and anxiety.

6.8.3 Management of e-waste
E-waste management is the efficient disposal of e-waste. 
Although we cannot completely destroy e-waste, still 
certain steps and measures have to be taken to reduce 
harm to the humans and environment. Some of the 
feasible methods of e-waste management are reduce, 
reuse and recycle. 

• Reduce: We should try to reduce the generation of 
e-waste by purchasing the electronic or electrical 
devices only according to our need. Also, they 
should be used to their maximum capacity and 
discarded only after their useful life has ended. 
Good maintenance of electronics devices also 
increases the life of the devices. 

• Reuse: It is the process of re-using the electronic 
or electric waste after slight modification. The 
electronic equipment that is still functioning should 
be donated or sold to someone who is still willing to 
use it. The process of re-selling old electronic goods 
at lower prices is called refurbishing.

• Recycle: Recycling is the process of conversion of 
electronic devices into something that can be used 
again and again in some or the other manner. Only 
those products should be recycled that cannot 
be repaired, refurbished or re-used. To promote 
recycling of e-waste many companies and NGOs 
are providing door-to-door pick up facilities for 
collecting the e-waste from homes and offices.

6.8.4 E-waste Management in India
In India, the Environmental Protection Act, 1986, has Think and Reflect
been enacted to punish people responsible for causing 
any form of pollution by paying for the damage done to Do you follow 

precautions to stay 
the natural environment. According to this act, “Polluter healthy - physically, 
pays Principle”, any one causing any form of pollution mentally as well as 
will pay for the damage caused. Any violation of the emotionally while using 
provisions of this act is liable for punishment. digital technologies?

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   185 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



186 InformatIcs PractIces

The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has 
issued a formal set of guidelines for proper handling 
and disposal of e-waste. According to these guidelines, 
the manufacturer of any electronic equipment will be 
“personally” responsible for the final safe disposal of the 
product when it becomes an e-waste.

The Department of Information Technology (DIT), 
Ministry of Communication and Information Technology, 
has also issued a comprehensive technical guide on 
“Environmental Management for Information Technology 
Industry in India.” The industries have to follow these 
guidelines for recycling and reuse of e-waste. In order to 

Device Safety: Ensures make the consumers aware of the recycling of e-waste, 
Good Health of a prominent smartphone and computer manufacturing 
Computer System companies have started various recycling programs.
√ Regularly clean it 

to keep the dust 6.9 Impact on health
off. Use a liquid 
solution specifically As digital technologies have penetrated into different 
formulated for fields, we are spending more time in front of screens, be 
the cleaning of it mobile, laptop, desktop, television, gaming console, 
electronic screens. music or sound device. But interacting in an improper 

√ Wipe monitor’s posture can be bad for us — both physically, and 
screen often mentally. Besides, spending too much time on Internet 
using the regular 
microfibre soft cloth can be addictive and can have a negative impact on our 
(the one used for physical and psychological well being.
spectacles). However, these health concerns can be addressed 

√ Keep it away from to some extent by taking care of the way we position 
direct heat, sunlight such devices and the way we position our posture. 
and put it in a Ergonomics is a branch of science that deals with 
room with enough 
ventilation for air designing or arranging workplaces including the 
circulation. furniture, equipments and systems so that it becomes 

√ Do not eat food safe and comfortable for the user. Ergonomics helps us 
or drink over the in reducing the strain on our bodies — including the 
keyboard. Food fatigue and injuries due to prolonged use. 
crumbs that fall When we continuously look at the screen for 
into the gaps watching, typing, chatting or playing games, our eyes 
between the keys or 
spilled over liquid are continuously exposed to the glare coming from the 
can cause issues to screens. Looking at small handheld devices makes it 
the devices. worse. Eye strain is a symptom commonly complained 

by users of digital devices. Ergonomically maintaining 
the viewing distance and angle, along with the position 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   186 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



 Societal impactS 187

can be of some help. Figure 6.5 shows the posture to 
be maintained in order to avoid fatigue caused due to 
prolonged use of computer system and other digital 
devices. However, to get rid of dry, watering, or itchy 
eyes, it is better to periodically focus on distant objects, 
and take a break for outdoor activities.

Viewing Distance 19”-24”
Viewing Angle

Wrist Straight
Lumber 900

Support 
for Lower
Back

Seat Back Angle 900 Maintain a Balance!!
900 Knee Enjoy the exciting 

Angle world of digital devices 
in tandem with other 
pursuits of thrilling 

Adjustable Seat sports and hobbies. 
Height 23”-28” Feet on floor Online friends are good, 

footrest for but spending time with 
shorter people friends in real life is 

very fulfilling. Often the 
wholesome nature of 

real interactions cannot 
be compared to just 

Figure 6.5: Correct posture while sitting in front of a computer online social networking.

Bad posture, backaches, neck and shoulder pains 
can be prevented by arranging the workspace as 
recommended by ergonomics. Overuse of keyboards 
(be it physical keyboard or touchscreen-based virtual 
keyboard) not aligned ergonomically, can give rise to a 
painful condition of wrists and fingers, and may require 
medical help in the long run. 

Stress, physical fatigue and obesity are the other 
related impacts the body may face if one spends too 
much time using digital devices.

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   187 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



188 InformatIcs PractIces

notes
Summary

• Digital footprint is the trail of data we leave behind 
when we visit any website (or use any online 
application or portal) to fill-in data or perform 
any transaction.

• A user of digital technology needs to follow certain 
etiquettes like net-etiquettes, communication-
etiquettes and social media-etiquettes.

• Net-etiquette includes avoiding copyright 
violations, respecting privacy and diversity of 
users, and avoiding cyber bullies and cyber trolls, 
besides sharing of expertise.

• Communication-etiquette requires us to be precise 
and polite in our conversation so that we remain 
credible through our remarks and comments.

• While using social media, one needs to take care 
of security through password, be aware of fake 
information and be careful while befriending 
unknowns. Care must be taken while sharing 
anything on social media as it may create havoc 
if being mishandled, particularly our personal, 
sensitive information.

• Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) help in data 
protection through copyrights, patents and 
trademarks. There are both ethical and legal 
aspects of violating IPR. A good digital citizen 
should avoid plagiarism, copyright infringement 
and trademark infringement.

• Certain software are made available for free public 
access. Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) 
allow users to not only access but also to modify 
(or improve) them.

• Cyber crimes include various criminal activities 
carried out to steal data or to break down 
important services. These include hacking, 
spreading viruses or malware, sending phishing 
or fraudulent emails, ransomware, etc. 

• Excessive usage of digital devices has a negative 
impact on our physical as well as psychological 
well-being. Ergonomic positioning of devices as 
well as our posture are important. 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   188 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



 Societal impactS 189

Exercise notes

1. After practicals, Atharv left the computer laboratory 
but forgot to sign off from his email account. Later, 
his classmate Revaan started using the same 
computer. He is now logged in as Atharv. He sends 
inflammatory email messages to few of his classmates 
using Atharv’s email account. Revaan’s activity is 
an example of which of the following cyber crime? 
Justify your answer.
a) Hacking
b) Identity theft
c) Cyber bullying
d) Plagiarism

2. Rishika found a crumpled paper under her desk. 
She picked it up and opened it. It contained some 
text which was struck off thrice. But she could still 
figure out easily that the struck off text was the email 
ID and password of Garvit, her classmate. What is 
ethically correct for Rishika to do?
a) Inform Garvit so that he may change his password.
b) Give the password of Garvit’s email ID to all other 

classmates.
c) Use Garvit’s password to access his account.

3. Suhana is down with fever. So, she decided not to 
go to school tomorrow. Next day, in the evening 
she called up her classmate, Shaurya and enquired 
about the computer class. She also requested him to 
explain the concept. Shaurya said, “Mam taught us 
how to use tuples in python”. Further, he generously 
said, “Give me some time, I will email you the material 
which will help you to understand tuples in python”. 
Shaurya quickly downloaded a 2-minute clip from the 
Internet explaining the concept of tuples in python. 
Using video editor, he added the text “Prepared by 
Shaurya” in the downloaded video clip. Then, he 
emailed the modified video clip to Suhana. This act 
of Shaurya is an example of —
a) Fair use 
b) Hacking
c) Copyright infringement
d) Cyber crime

4. After a fight with your friend, you did the following 
activities. Which of these activities is not an example 
of cyber bullying?

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   189 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



190 InformatIcs PractIces

notes a) You sent an email to your friend with a message 
saying that “I am sorry”.

b) You sent a threatening message to your friend 
saying “Do not try to call or talk to me”.

c) You created an embarrassing picture of your 
friend and uploaded on your account on a social 
networking site.

5. Sourabh has to prepare a project on “Digital India 
Initiatives”. He decides to get information from the 
Internet. He downloads three web pages (webpage 
1, webpage 2, webpage 3) containing information on 
Digital India Initiatives. Which of the following steps 
taken by Sourabh is an example of plagiarism or 
copyright infringement? Give justification in support 
of your answer. 
a) He read a paragraph on “ Digital India Initiatives” 

from webpage 1 and rephrased it in his own 
words. He finally pasted the rephrased paragraph 
in his project.

b) He downloaded three images of “ Digital India 
Initiatives” from webpage 2. He made a collage for 
his project using these images.

c) He downloaded “Digital India Initiative” icon from 
web page 3 and pasted it on the front page of his 
project report.

6. Match the following:
Column A Column B

Plagiarism Fakers, by offering special rewards or money 
prize asked for personal information, such as 
bank account information

Hacking Copy and paste information from the Internet 
into your report and then organise it

Credit card fraud The trail that is created when a person uses 
the Internet.

Digital Foot Print Breaking into computers to read private emails 
and other files

7. You got the below shown SMS from your bank querying 
a recent transaction. Answer the following —
a) Will you SMS your pin number to the given 

contact number?
b) Will you call the bank helpline number to recheck 

the validity of the SMS received?
8. Preeti celebrated her birthday with her family. She 

was excited to share the moments with her friend 
Himanshu. She uploaded selected images of her 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   190 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



 Societal impactS 191

birthday party on a social networking site so that 
Himanshu can see them. After few days, Preeti had a 
fight with Himanshu. Next morning, she deleted her 
birthday photographs from that social networking 
site, so that Himanshu cannot access them. Later 
in the evening, to her surprise, she saw that one 
of the images which she had already deleted from 
the social networking site was available with their 
common friend Gayatri. She hurriedly enquired 
Gayatri “Where did you get this picture from?”. 
Gayatri replied “Himanshu forwarded this image few 
minutes back”. 
   Help Preeti to get answers for the following questions. 
Give justification for your answers so that Preeti can 
understand it clearly.
a) How could Himanshu access an image which I 

had already deleted? 
b) Can anybody else also access these deleted 

images?
c) Had these images not been deleted from my digital 

footprint?
9. The school offers wireless facility (wifi) to the Computer 

Science students of Class XI. For communication, 
the network security staff of the school have a 
registered URL schoolwifi.edu. On 17 September 
2017, the following email was mass distributed to 
all the Computer Science students of Class XI. The 
email claimed that the password of the students was 
about to expire. Instructions were given to go to URL 
to renew their password within 24 hours.

A+B

a) Do you find any discrepancy in this email?
b) What will happen if the student will click on the 

given URL?

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   191 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



192 InformatIcs PractIces

notes c) Is the email an example of cyber crime? If yes, 
then specify which type of cyber crime is it. Justify 
your answer.

10. You are planning to go for a vacation. You surfed the 
Internet to get answers for the following queries —
a) Weather conditions
b) Availability of air tickets and fares
c) Places to visit
d) Best hotel deals
Which of your above mentioned actions might have 
created a digital footprint?

11. How would you recognise if one of your friends is 
being cyber bullied? 
a) Cite the online activities which would help you 

detect that your friend is being cyber bullied? 
b) What provisions are in IT Act 2000, (amended in 

2008) to combact such situations. 
12. Write the differences between the following —

a) Copyrights and Patents
b) Plagiarism and Copyright infringement
c) Non-ethical hacking and Ethical hacking
d) Active and Passive footprints
e) Free software and Free and open source software

13. If you plan to use a short text from an article on the 
web, what steps must you take in order to credit the 
sources used?

14. When you search online for pictures, how will you 
find pictures that are available in the free public 
domain. How can those pictures be used in your 
project without copyright violations? 

15. Describe why it is important to secure your wireless 
router at home. Search the Internet to find the rules 
to create a reasonably secure password. Create an 
imaginary password for your home router. Will you 
share your password for home router with following 
people. Justify your answer.
a) Parents
b) Friends
c) Neighbours
d) Home tutors

16. List down the steps you need to take in order to 
ensure —

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   192 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



 Societal impactS 193

a) your computer is in good working condition for a 
longer time. 

b) smart and safe Internet surfing.
17. What is data privacy? Websites that you visit collect 

 what type of information about you?
18. In the computer science class, Sunil and Jagdish 

were assigned the following task by their teacher.
a) Sunil was asked to find information about “India, 

a Nuclear power”. He was asked to use Google 
Chrome browser and prepare his report using 
Google Docs.

b) Jagdish was asked to find information about 
“Digital India”. He was asked to use Mozilla Firefox 
browser and prepare his report using Libre Office 
Writer.

 What is the difference between technologies used by 
Sunil and Jagdish?

19. Cite examples depicting that you were a victim of 
following cyber crime. Also, cite provisions in IT Act 
to deal with such a cyber crime.
a) Identity theft
b) Credit card account theft

20. Neerja is a student of Class XI. She has opted for 
Computer Science. Neerja prepared the project 
assigned to her. She mailed it to her teacher. The 
snapshot of that email is shown below.

    Find out which of the following email etiquettes 
are missing in it. Justify your answer. 

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   193 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM



194 InformatIcs PractIces

notes a) Subject of the mail
b) Formal greeting
c) Self-explanatory terms
d) Identity of the sender
e) Regards

21. Sumit got good marks in all the subjects. His father 
gifted him a laptop. He would like to make Sumit 
aware of health hazards associated with inappropriate 
and excessive use of laptop. Help his father to list the 
points which he should discuss with Sumit.

2024-25

Chapter 6.indd   194 10/9/2020   12:36:55 PM