UNIITT

IIIIII

CURRENT CHALLENGES FACING THE

INDIAN ECONOMY

2024-25



4

HUMAN CAPITAL

FORMATION IN INDIA

 After studying this chapter, the learners will understand

• the concepts of Human Resource, Human Capital Formation and Human
Development

• the links between investment in human capital, economic growth and
human development

• the need for government spending on education and health

• the state of India’s educational attainment.

2024-25



“... the wisdom of expending public and private funds on education is not to be
measured by its direct fruits alone. It will be profitable as a mere investment,
to give the masses of  people much greater opportunities than they can generally
avail themselves of. For by this means many, who would have died unknown,
are enabled to get the start needed for bringing out their latent abilities”.

Alfred Marshall

4.1 INTRODUCTION
to generate more income than the latter

Think of one factor that has made a and his or her contribution to economic
great difference in the evolution of growth is, consequently, more.
mankind. Perhaps it is human Education is sought not only as it
capacity to store and transmit confers higher earning capacity on
knowledge which they have been doing people but also for its other highly
through conversation, through songs valued benefits: it gives one a better
and through elaborate lectures. But social standing and pride; it enables
humans soon found out that we need one to make better choices in life; it
a good deal of training and skill to do provides knowledge to understand the
things efficiently. We know that the changes taking place in society; it also
labour skill of an educated person is stimulates innovations. Moreover,
more than that of an uneducated the availability of educated labour
person and hence the former is able force facilitates adaptation of new

Fig. 4.1 Adequate education and training to  farmers can raise productivity in farms

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA 59

2024-25



technologies. Economists have stressed 4.3 SOURCES OF HUMAN CAPITAL

the need for expanding educational
Investment in education is considered

opportunities in a nation as it
as one of the main sources of human

accelerates the development process.
capital. There are several other sources

4.2 WHAT IS H as well. Investments in health, on- the-
UMAN CAPITAL?

job training, migration and information
Just as a country can turn physical are the other sources of human capital
resources like land into physical formation.
capital like factories, similarly, it can Why do your parents spend
also turn human resources like money on education? Spending on
nurses, farmers, teachers, students
into human capital like engineers and Work This Out

doctors. Societies need sufficient Ø Identify and collect the data

human capital in the first place —in from three families from
different strata (i) very poor

the form of competent people who have
(ii) middle class and (iii)

themselves been educated and trained affluent. Study the
as professors and other professionals. expenditure pattern of the
In other words, we need good human families on education of
capital to produce other human capital male and female children.

(say, nurses, farmers, teachers,
education by individuals is similar to

doctors, engineers...). This means that
spending on capital goods by

we need investment in human capital
to produce more human capital out of companies with the objective of

human resources. increasing future profits over a period
of time. Likewise, individuals invest

Let us understand a little more of
in education with the objective of

what human capital means by posing
increasing their future income.

the following questions :
Like education, health is also

(i) What are the sources of human considered as an important input for
capital? the development of a nation as much

(ii) Is there any relation between as it is important for the development
human capital and economic of an individual.
growth of a country? Who can work better —a sick

(iii) Is the formation of human person or a person with sound health?
capital linked to people’s all-round A sick labourer without access to
development or, as it is now called, medical facilities is compelled to
human development? abstain from work and there is loss of

(iv) What role can the  government productivity. Hence, expenditure on
play in human capital formation health is an important source of
in India? human capital formation.

60 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2024-25



The amount of money
spent on preventive
medicine (vaccination),
curative medicine
(medical intervention
during illness), social
medicine (spread of
health literacy) and
provision of clean

drinking water and good sanitation places. Unemployment is the reason for
are the various forms of health the rural-urban migration in India.
expenditures. Health expenditure Technically qualified persons, like
directly increases the supply of healthy engineers and doctors, migrate to other
labour force and is, thus, a source of countries because of higher salaries

human capital that they may get in such countries.
formation. Migration in both these cases involves
Firms spend on cost of transport, higher cost of living
giving on-the- in the migrated places and psychic
job-training to costs of living in a strange socio-
their workers. cultural setup. The enhanced earnings
This may take in the new place outweigh the costs of
different forms: migration; hence, expenditure on

one, the workers may be trained in the migration is also a source of human
firm itself under the supervision of a capital formation.
skilled worker; two, the workers may People spend to acquire
be sent for off-campus training. In both information relating to the labour
these cases firms incur some expenses. market and other markets like
Firms will, thus, insist that the workers education and health. For example,
should work for a specific period of people want to know the level of salaries
time, after their on-the-job training, associated with various types of jobs,
during which it can recover the benefits whether the educational institutions
of the enhanced productivity owing to provide the right type of employable
the training. Expenditure regarding on- skills and at what cost. This information
the-job training is a source of human is necessary to make decisions
capital formation as the return of such regarding investments in human capital
expenditure in the form of enhanced as well as for efficient utilisation of the
labour productivity is more than the acquired human capital stock.
cost of it. Expenditure incurred for acquiring

People migrate in search of jobs information relating to the labour
that fetch them higher salaries than market and other markets is also a
what they may get in their native source of human capital formation.

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA 61

2024-25



Box 4.1: Physical and Human Capital

Both the forms of capital formation are outcomes of conscious investment decisions.
Decision regarding investment in physical capital is taken on the basis of one’s knowledge
in this regard. The entrepreneur possesses knowledge to calculate the expected rates of
return to a range of investments and then rationally decides which one of the
investments should be made. The ownership of physical capital is the outcome of the
conscious decision of the owner —  the physical capital formation is mainly an economic
and technical process. A substantial part of the human capital formation takes place
in one’s life when she/he is unable to decide whether it would maximise her/his earnings.
Children are given different types of school education and health care facilities by their
parents and the society. The peers, educators and society influence the decisions
regarding human capital investments even at the tertiary level, that is, at the college
level. Moreover, the human capital formation at this stage is dependent upon the already
formed human capital at the school level. Human capital formation is partly a social
process and partly a conscious decision of the possessor of the human capital.

You know that the owner of a physical capital, say a bus, need not be present in
the place where it is used; whereas, a bus-driver, who possesses the knowledge and
ability to drive the bus, should be present when the bus is used for transportation of
people and materials. Physical capital is tangible and can be easily sold in the market
like any other commodity. Human capital is intangible; it is endogenously built in the
body and mind of its owner. Human capital is not sold in the market; only the services
of the human capital are sold and, hence, there arises the necessity of the owner of the
human capital to be present in the place of production. The physical capital is
separable from its owner, whereas, human capital is inseparable from its owner.

The two forms of capital differ in terms of mobility across space. Physical capital is
completely mobile between countries except for some artificial trade restrictions. Human
capital is not perfectly mobile between countries as movement is restricted by nationality
and culture. Therefore, physical capital formation can be built even through imports,
whereas human capital formation is to be done through conscious policy formulations
in consonance with the nature of the society and economy and expenditure by the
state and the individuals.

Both forms of capital depreciate with time but the nature of depreciation differs
between the two. Continuous use of machine leads to depreciation and change of
technology makes a machine obsolete. In the case of human capital, depreciation takes
place with ageing but can be reduced, to a large extent, through continuous investment
in education, health, etc. This investment also facilitates the human capital to cope
with change in technology which is not the case with physical capital.

Nature of benefits flowing from human capital are  different from that of physical
capital. Human capital benefits not only the owner but also the society in general. This
is called external benefit. An educated person can effectively take part in a democratic
process and contribute to the socio-economic progress of a nation. A healthy person,
by maintaining personal hygiene and sanitation, stops the spread of contagious diseases
and epidemics. Human capital creates both private and social benefits, whereas physical
capital creates only private benefit. That is, benefits from a capital good flow to those
who pay the price for the product and services produced by it.

62 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2024-25



The concept of physical capital is
the base for conceptualising human
capital. There are some similarities Look at Fig. 4.2

between the two forms of capital; there and discuss.

are some striking dissimilarities as
(a) What are the advantages of

well. See Box 4.1.
having proper ‘classroom’?

Human Capital and Economic (b) Do you think the children
Growth: Who contributes more to going to this schol are
national income —  a worker in a factory receiving quality education?

or a software professional? We know
(c) Why these schools do not

that the labour skill of an educated have buildings?
person is more than that of an
uneducated person and that the former
generates more income than the latter. uninterrupted labour supply for a
Economic growth means the increase longer period of time, then health is
in real national income of a country; also an important factor for economic
naturally, the contribution of the growth. Thus, both education and
educated person to economic growth health, along with many other factors
is more than that of an illiterate person. like on-the-job training, job market
If a healthy person could provide information and migration, increase an

Fig. 4.2 Creating human capital: a school being run in make shift premises in Delhi

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA 63

2024-25



individual’s income generating
capacity.

 This enhanced productivity of
human beings or human capital
contributes substantially not only
towards increasing labour
productivity but also stimulates
innovations and creates ability to
absorb new technologies. Education
provides knowledge to understand
changes in society and scientific
advancements, thus, facilitate
inventions and innovations. Similarly,
the availability of educated labour
force facilitates adaptation to new

Fig. 4.3 Scientific and technical manpower: a
technologies. rich ingredient of human capital

Empirical evidence to prove that
increase in human capital causes

causality between human capital and
economic growth is rather nebulous.

economic growth flows in either
This may be because of measurement

directions. That is, higher income
problems. For example, education

causes building of high level of human
measured in terms of years of

capital and vice versa, that is, high level
schooling, teacher-pupil ratio and

of human capital causes growth of
enrolment rates may not reflect the
quality of education; health services income.

measured in monetary terms, life India recognised the importance of

expectancy and mortality rates may human capital in economic growth

not reflect the true health status of the long ago. The Seventh Five Year Plan

people in a country. Using the says, “Human resources development

indicators mentioned above, an (read human capital) has necessarily

analysis of improvement in education to be assigned a key role in any

and health sectors and growth in real development strategy, particularly in

per capita income in both developing a country with a large population.

and developed countries shows that Trained and educated on sound lines,

there is convergence in the measures a large population can itself become
of human capital but no sign of an asset in accelerating economic
convergence of per capita real income. growth and in ensuring social change
In other words, the human capital in desired directions.”
growth in developing countries has It is difficult to establish a relation of
been faster but the growth of per capita cause and effect from the growth of
real income has not been that fast. human capital (education and health)
There are reasons to believe that the to economic growth but we can see in

64 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2024-25



TABLE 4.1

Select Indicators of Development in Education and Health Sectors

Particulars 1951 1981 1991 2001 2016-17
Real Per Capita  Income (in Rs) 7,651 12,174 15,748 23,095 77,659

Crude Death 25.1 12.5 9.8 8.1 6.3
Rate (Per 1,000 Population)

Infant Mortality Rate 146 110 80 63 33

Life Expectancy Male 37.2 54.1 59.7 63.9 67
at Birth (in Years)

Female 36.2 54.7 60.9 66.9 70

Literacy Rate (%) 16.67 43.57 52.21 65.20 76

Source: Economic Survey for various years, Ministry of Finance; National Statistical Office, Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India.

Table  4.1 that these sectors have grown workforce, particularly involving
simultaneously. Growth in each sector mathematics, computer science, and
probably has reinforced the growth of data science, in conjunction with
every other sector. multidisciplinary abilities across the

The National Education Policy sciences and social sciences, and
2020 states that the world is humanities, will be increasingly in
undergoing rapid changes in the greater demand. With climate change,
knowledge landscape. With various increasing pollution, and depleting
dramatic scientific and technological natural resources, there will be a
advances, such as the rise of big data, sizeable shift in how we meet the world’s
machine learning, and artificial energy, water, food, and sanitation
intelligence, many unskilled jobs needs, again resulting in the need for
worldwide may be taken over by new skilled labour, particularly in
machines, while the need for a skilled biology, chemistry, physics,

agriculture, climate science, and
social science. The growing
emergence of epidemics and
pandemics will also call for
collaborative research in infectious
disease management and
development of vaccines and the
resultant social issues heightens
the need for multidisciplinary
learning. There will be a growing
demand for humanities and art, as
India moves towards becoming a

Fig. 4.4  Job on hand: transforming India into a developed country as well as
  knowledge economy

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA 65

2024-25



Box 4.2: India as a Knowledge Economy

The Indian software industry has been showing an impressive record over the
past two decades. Entrepreneurs, bureaucrats and politicians are now advancing
views about how India can transform itself into a knowledge-based economy by
using information technology (IT). There have been some instances of villagers
using e-mail which are cited as examples of such transformation. Likewise, e-
governance is being projected as the way of the future. The value of IT depends
greatly on the existing level of economic development. Do you think IT - based
services in rural areas will lead to human development? Discuss.

among the three largest economies in human beings are ends in themselves.
the world. This policy vision suggests Human welfare should be increased
how human capital formation in India through investments in education and
will move its economy to a higher health even if such investments do not
growth trajectory based on knowledge result in higher labour productivity.
landscape. Therefore, basic education and basic

health are important in themselves,
4.4 HUMAN CAPITAL AND HUMAN irrespective of their contribution to

DEVELOPMENT labour productivity. In such a view,
every individual has a right to get basic

The two terms sound similar but there education and basic health care, that
is a clear distinction between them. is, every individual has a right to be
Human capital considers education literate and lead a healthy life.
and health as a means to increase
labour productivity. Human
development is based on the idea that Work This Out
education and health are integral to
human well-being because only when Ø If a construction worker,
people have the ability to read and maid-servant, dhobi or a
write and the ability to lead a long peon in school has absented
and healthy life, they herself/himself for long due
will be able to make other choices to ill health, find out how it
which they value. Human capital has affected her/his
treats human beings as a means to (i) job security
an end; the end being the increase
in productivity. In this view, any (ii) wage/salary

investment in education and health is
unproductive if it does not enhance What could be the possible

reasons?
output of goods and services. In the
human development perspective,

66 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2024-25



4.5 STATE  OF HUMAN  CAPITAL instance, once a child is admitted to a
FORMATION IN INDIA school or health care centre where the

required services are not provided,
In this section we are going to analyse before the decision is taken to shift the
human capital formation in India. We child to another institution, substantial
have already learnt that human amount of damage would have been
capital formation is the outcome done. Moreover, individual consumers
of investments in education, health, of these services do not have complete
on-the-job training, migration and information about the quality of
information. Of these education and services and their costs. In this
health are very important sources of situation, the providers of education
human capital formation. We know and health services acquire monopoly
that India is a federal country with a power and are involved in exploitation.
union government, state governments The role of government in this situation
and local governments (Municipal is to ensure that the private providers of
Corporations, Municipalities and these services adhere to the standards
Village Panchayats). The Constitution stipulated by the government and
of India mentions the functions to charge the correct price.
be carried out by each level of In India, the ministries of
government. Accordingly, expendi- education at the union and state level,
tures on both education and health are departments of education and various
to be carried out simultaneously by all organisations like National Council of
the three tiers of the government. Educational Research and Training
Analysis of health sector is taken up (NCERT), University Grants Commission
in Chapter 8; hence, we will analyse (UGC) and All India Council of
only the education sector here. Technical Education (AICTE) facilitate

Do you know who takes care of institutions which come under the
education and health in India? Before education sector. Similarly, the
we take up the analysis of the education ministries of health at the union and
sector in India, we will look into the state level, departments of health and
need for government intervention in various organisations like National
education and health sectors. We do Medical Commission and Indian
understand that education and health Council for Medical Research (ICMR)
care services create both private and facilitate institutions which come under
social benefits and this is the reason the health sector.
for the existence of both private and In a developing country like India,
public institutions in the education and with a large section of the population
health service markets. Expenditures living below the poverty line, many
on education and health make people cannot afford to access basic
substantial long-term impact and they education and health care facilities.
cannot be easily reversed; hence, Moreover, a substantial section
government intervention is essential. For of India’s population cannot afford

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA 67

2024-25



to reach super specialty health care the development of education in
and higher education. Furthermore, the country. During 1952-2014,
when basic education and health care education expenditure as percentage
is considered as a right of the citizens, of total government expenditure
then it is essential that the government increased from 7.92 to 15.7 and as
should provide education and health percentage of GDP increased from
services free of cost for the deserving 0.64 to 4.13. Throughout this period
citizens and those from the socially the increase in education expenditure
oppressed classes. Both, the union has not been uniform and there has
and state governments, have been been irregular rise and fall. To this if
stepping up expenditures in the we include the private expenditure
education sector over the years in incurred by individuals and by
order to fulfil the objective of attaining philanthropic institutions, the total
cent per cent literacy and considerably education expenditure should be
increase the average educational much higher.
attainment of Indians. Elementary education takes a major

share of total education expenditure
Work This Out and the share of the higher/tertiary

education (institutions of higher

Ø Identify the objectives and learning like colleges, polytechnics and

functions of NCERT, UGC, universities) is the least. Though, on an
AICTE and ICMR. average, the government spends less

on tertiary education, ‘expenditure per
student’ in tertiary education is higher

4.6 EDUCATION SECTOR IN INDIA than that of elementary. This does not
Growth in Government Expenditure mean that financial resources should be
on Education: Do you know how transferred from tertiary education to
much the government spends on elementary education. As we expand
education? This expenditure by the school education, we need more
government is expressed in two ways teachers who are trained in the higher
(i) as a percentage of ‘total government educational institutions; therefore,
expenditure’ (ii) as a percentage of expenditure on all levels of education
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). should be increased.

The percentage of ‘education In 2014-15, the per capita public
expenditure of total government expenditure on elementary education
expenditure’ indicates the importance differs considerably across states from
of education in the scheme of as high as Rs 34,651 in Himachal
things before the government. The Pradesh to as low as Rs 4088 in Bihar.
percentage of ‘education expenditure This leads to differences in educational
of GDP’ expresses how much of opportunities and attainments across
people’s income is being committed to states.

68 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2024-25



99 to 2006-07) to bring all
Indian children in the age
group of 6-14 years under
the purview of school
education. Compared to this
desired level of education
expenditure of around 6 per
cent of GDP, the current level
of a little over 4 per cent has
been quite inadequate. In
principle,  a goal of 6 per cent
needs to be reached—this

Fig. 4.5 Investment in educational infrastructure is inevitable has been accepted  as a must
for the coming years. In 2009,

One can understand the inadequacy the Government of India enacted the
of the expenditure on education if we Right of Children to Free and
compare it with the desired level of Compulsory Education Act to make
education expenditure as recommended free education a fundamental right of
by the various commissions. The all children in the age group of 6-14
Education Commission (1964–66) had years.
recommended that at least 6 per cent of Government of India has  also
GDP be spent on education so as to started levying a 2 per cent ‘education
make a noticeable rate of growth in cess’ on all Union taxes. The revenues
educational achievements.  The Tapas from education cess has been
Majumdar Committee, appointed by earmarked for spending on elementary
the Government of India in 1999, education. In addition to this, the
estimated an expenditure of around Rs government sanctions a large outlay for
1.37 lakh crore over 10 years (1998- the promotion of higher education and

Work These Out

Ø Prepare case studies of dropouts at different levels of schooling, say

 (i) Primary dropouts

(ii) Class VIII dropouts

(iii) Class X dropouts

Find out the causes and discuss in the class.

Ø ‘School dropouts are giving way to child labour’. Discuss how this is a loss
to human capital.

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA 69

2024-25



TABLE 4.2

Educational Attainment in India

Sl.No. Particulars 1990 2000 2011 2017-18

1. Adult Literacy Rate (per cent of people aged 15+)
1.1 Male 61.9 68.4 79 82
1.2 Female 37.9 45.4 59 66

2. Primary completion rate (per cent of relevant age group)
2.1 Male 78 85 92 93
2.2 Female 61 69 94 96

3. Youth literacy rate (per cent of people aged 15+ to 24)
3.1 Male 76.6 79.7 90 93
3.2 Female 54.2 64.8 82 90

new loan schemes for students to 4.7 FUTURE PROSPECTS

pursue higher education. Education for All — Still a Distant
Dream: Though literacy rates for both

Educational Achievements in — adults as  well as  youth — have
India: Generally,  educational increased, still the absolute number
achievements in a country are of illiterates in India is as much as
indicated in terms India’s population was at the time of

of adult literacy level, primary independence. In 1950, when the

education completion rate and youth Constitution of India was passed by the

literacy rate. These statistics for the Constituent Assembly, it was noted in
the Directive Principles of the

last two decades are given above in
Table 4.2.

Fig. 4.6 School dropouts give way to child labour: a loss to human capital

70 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2024-25



Constitution that the government unemployment among educated youth
should provide free and compulsory is the highest. As per NSSO data, in the
education for all children up to the age year 2011-12, the rate of
of 14 years within 10 years from the unemployment among youth males
commencement of the Constitution. who studied graduation and above in
Had we achieved this, we would have rural areas was 19 per cent. Their urban
cent per cent literacy by now. counterparts had relatively less level of

unemployment at 16 per cent. The most
Gender Equity — Better than Before: severely affected ones were young rural
The differences in literacy rates between female graduates as nearly 30 per cent
males and females are narrowing of them are unemployed. In contrast to
signifying a positive development in this, only about 3-6 per cent of primary
gender equity; still  the need to promote level educated youth in rural and urban
education for women in India is areas were unemployed. The situation
imminent for various reasons such as is yet to improve as indicated by the
improving economic independence and Periodic Labour Force Survey 2017-18.
social status of women and also Therefore, the government should
because women education makes a increase allocation for higher education
favourable impact on fertility rate and and also improve the standard of higher
health care of women and children. education institutions, so that students
Therefore, we cannot be complacent are imparted employable skills in such
about the upward movement in the institutions. When compared to less
literacy rates and we have miles to go in educated, a large proportion of educated
achieving  cent per cent adult literacy. persons are unemployed. Why?

4.8 CONCLUSION

The economic and social benefits of
human capital formation and human
development are well known. The union
and state governments in India have
been earmarking substantial financial
outlays for development of education
and health sectors. The spread of
education and health services across
different sectors of society should be
ensured so as to simultaneously attain

 Fig. 4.7 Higher Education:  few takers economic growth and equity. India has
Higher Education — a Few Takers: a  rich stock of scientific and technical
The Indian education pyramid is manpower in the world.  The need of the
steep, indicating lesser and lesser hour is to better it qualitatively and
number of people reaching the higher provide such conditions so that they are
education level. Moreover, the level of utilised in India.

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA 71

2024-25



Recap

Ø Investments in education convert human beings into human capital; human
capital represents enhanced labour productivity, which is an acquired ability
and an outcome of deliberate investment decisions with an expectation that
it will increase future income sources.

Ø Investments in education, on-the-job training, health, migration and
information are the sources of human capital formation.

Ø The concept of physical capital is the base for conceptualising human capital.
There are some similarities as well as dissimilarities between the two forms
of capital formation.

Ø Investment in human capital formation is considered as efficient and growth
enhancing.

Ø Human development is based on the idea that education and health are
integral to human well-being because only when people have the ability to
read and write and the ability to lead a long and healthy life, will they be
able to make other choices which they value.

Ø The percentage of expenditure on education of the total government
expenditure indicates the importance of education in the scheme of things
for the government.

EXERCISES

1. What are the two major sources of human capital in a country?

2. What are the indicators of educational achievement in a country?

3. Why do we observe regional differences in educational attainment
in India?

4. Bring out the differences between human capital and human
development.

5. How is human development a broader term as compared to human
capital?

6. What factors contribute to human capital formation?

72 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2024-25



7. How government organisations facilitate the functioning of schools
and hospitals in India?

8. Education is considered to be an important input for the development
of a nation. How?

9. Discuss the following as a source of human capital formation

(i)  Health infrastructure

(ii)  Expenditure on migration.

10. Establish the need for acquiring information relating to health and
education expenditure for the effective utilisation of human
resources.

11. How does investment in human capital contribute to growth?

12. ‘There is a downward trend in inequality world-wide with a rise in
the average education levels’. Comment.

13. Examine the role of education in the economic development of a
nation.

14. Explain how investment in education stimulates economic growth.

15. Bring out the need for on-the-job-training for a person.

16. Trace the relationship between human capital and economic growth.

17. Discuss the need for promoting women’s education in India.

18. Argue in favour of the need for different forms of government
intervention in education and health sectors.

19. What are the main problems of human capital formation in India?

20. In your view, is it essential for the government to regulate the fee
structure in education and health care institutions? If so, why?

SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES

1. Identify how Human Development Index is calculated. What is the
position of India in the World Human Development Index?

2. Is India going to be a knowledge based economy in the near future?
Discuss in the classroom.

3. Interpret the data given in Table 4.2.

4. As an educated person, what will be your contribution to the cause
of education? (Example ‘Each one — teach one’).

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA 73

2024-25



5. Enlist the various sources that provide information regarding
education, health and labour.

6. Read the annual reports of Union Ministries of Education and Health
and Family welfare and make summaries. Read the chapter on social
sector in the Economic Survey. These can be downloaded from websites
of the respective Union Government Ministries.

REFERENCES

Books

BECKER, GARY S. 1964. Human Capital. 2nd Edition, Columbia University
Press, New York.

FREEMAN, RICHARD. 1976. The Overeducated American. Academic Press,
New York.

SIDDHARTHAN, N.S. AND K. NARAYANAN (Eds.). 2013. Human Capital and Development
— The Indian Experience. Springer, New Delhi.

Government Reports

India Human Development Report 2011: Towards Social Inclusion, Plan-
ning Commission, Government of India.

Educational Statistics At a glance, Ministry of Education (for various years),
Government of India.

Annual Reports, Ministry of Education, Government of India.

National Education Policy 2020, Ministry of Education, Govt. of India,
New Delhi.

Websites

http://epathshala.nic.in
www.education.nic.in
www.cbse.nic.in
www.ugc.ac.in
www.aicte.ernet.in
www.ncert.nic.in
www.finmin.nic.in
www.mospi.nic.in
http://nroer.gov.in

74 INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2024-25